Bhagavad Gita Class Karma Yoga August 5, 2004. Chapter 3; Verse 1-5 Salt Spring Center. This was originally transcribed by ______ and edited for IAST and certain other formats in November 2024.
Q: Why does the Gita use battles vs. some other descriptive activity
A: Because human nature is violent. Do you see yourself getting angry?
Q: Yes.
A: You think you are right. The other party thinks they are right. A mini battle starts. But here, killing is not human to human. Here killing is your inborn enemy. You can say I don’t have inborn enemy, but anything that veils our real nature is the enemy. All battles are rooted in our internal nature. 

Q: Path of karma yoga in affluence and privilege. Duty to be Active in world like Gandhi [Mohanadāsa Karamacaṃda Gāṃdhī (Mahātmā)]
A: The [gītā] main teaching is karma yoga. [Gāṃdhī] Gandhi was a child of [Gītā] teaching. He understood the spirit of karma yoga. He sacrificed personal ego and put himself in the service of the public. 

Q: Should we put aside ease and comfort and act as [Gāṃdhī]?
A: Yes, but first we should have a deep conviction.

Q: Several paths. How one is drawn to certain path. Mind-body complex or higher consciousness which decides.
A: What we choose is the act of the ego. What is chosen for us, is the act of our inborn qualities. Everyone can’t be passionate. Some are naturally compassionate.

Q: What inner battles did [Gāṃdhī] face.
A: Passion. He was madly attached to his wife. When he saw his weakness, he started living an austere life. 

Q: Did he have conviction when he started his movement or did it develop as he went along
A: He was from a very spiritual family of [Gujarāt] in India. He studied scriptures and lived a pure life. He went to England to study law and there his friends wanted him to be as they are. He had inner purity, yet external impurities attacked him. 

Q: Professor organized 50,000 farmers in India by laughing 8 hours against gov't, which crumbled. How does this happen?
A:When?
Q: Recent. Saw on video.

Q: How to be so successful in organization and outcome without telecommunications. Americans don’t seem to do as well.
A: It is not an external organizing. It is an inner conviction which brings all like minded together. [Gāṃdhī] did not go out to organize. I hadn’t heard about the organizing of the farmers. 

Q: Is conviction absolute or is it qualified in terms of good or evil conviction. 
A: The negative and positive-pairs of opposites are in everything.” 









