Hi Sahadev,

I hope this finds you well. 2 months after I thought we
would be finished, we are finished.  Well not exactly.
We still have to get feedback about a few troublesome
words from our Sanskrit scholars. But all in all we have
completed our processes.  I am enclosing the new vocabulary
lists as .csv file. I was only able to download them sheet
by sheet. I am also enclosing the older Vcheck application.
We will now embark on correcting existing items and using
the updated Vcheck to expand the metadata and bring it
into compliance w the newer vocabulary list. Your Vcheck
renewal will be of significant importance in allowing us
to accomplish this task.

Overview:

VCheck needs to compare the list of source words in the
ready/<filename>.txt file to the official vocabulary
lists. There are now 4 different official lists, all of
which are in one spreadsheet file, “2024 Vocabulary
list”. It will also compare the source words to
a prohibited word list which is one sheet within the
Official Vocabulary List File.  <Prohibited Terms>. The
number of outputs has increased from 3 to 6 (Official
Word, Names of Persons, Techniques, Variations, New Words,
and Prohibited Words)

Vocabulary Lists:

The Official Vocabulary list file, 2024 Vocabulary List,
is a spreadsheet file with 5 different sheets, Sanskrit,
English, Names of Persons, Techniques and Prohibited
Terms. Each word in a source document has to be compared
to the lists of official words (Sanskrit and English) as
well as names, techniques, and prohibited words of these
official lists.

About Official Words:

Official Words are found in the sheets named:
“Sanskrit” and “English.  these words complete the
metadata field “dc.subject.keyword” and all are found
in Column D of these official vocabulary lists. When
there are more variations than 7, there is second row
of the same official word has been made., (There are
occasionally 3 rows). We want only one instance of the
official word; the redundancies of those official words
need to be removed. All variations from any and all of
related rows are a match and are entered into the output
for word variations

Names and Techniques are New to VCHeck:

Official Names are found in the file Names of Persons
sheet.  And Official Techniques are found in the file
Techniques sheet. Again, the variations, of these official
names and terms are also included in the same output, i.e.,
2) variations, as for the variations of the Official Words.
There is no need to separate them from the variations of
the Official words.

Prohibited Terms:

Prohibited terms are words that have been considered and
deemed to not be important for Library purposes and will
not be used as Keywords, variations, etc. When a match
occurs with a Source word and a word in the prohibited
list, that source word will be placed in a Discard output
cell.

Outputs:

There are now 6 possible outputs from this comparison for
each source file used in comparison. The Vcheck application
may find, using each source word from a source file, a
match to 1) an official word, when the match arises from
any of the appropriate columns of the English list or the
Sanskrit list, 2) the word variation(s), being the. other
words of the same row as the official word, name of person
, or technique that corresponds to the source word, 3)
an official name when the match is from the Official
Name of Person list, 4) an official technique, when the
match is from the Official Technique list, 5) a prohibited
word, and there may be no match, in which case it is 6) a
“New Word”. Note that the word variation now includes
variations of Names and of techniques whereas in the past
VCheck was only asked for variations of Official Words.

The output from the Vcheck application will be a .csv
file with the file values separated into 8 columns with
A.) headers of “file name”, B.) “dc.subject.keyword
“(Official Words), C.) “dc.subject.person (Official
Person’s Name),D.) “dc.subject.technique” (Official
Technique, E.)“dc.subject.;other” (all variations),
F.) “New Words” and finally G.)“discards”. The rows
have the source file name as the row header title. Values
with the cell for Columns B-E are separated by ||
separators. The others (F and G) are comma separated.

Wishful thinking: In the past we left the New Words alone
until we reached a critical mass 500 items) and revised
the vocabulary list. In order to make those revisions
you helped by offering us various tools to process the
new words.  Your tools gave us the following outputs:

New words listed uniquely with all source documents
associated with each.  Comparison against your lexicon
of English words so as to have a first sort of English
vs. Non-English words. (giving us 2 outputs: English
words found in New Word and lexicon and words not found
in lexicon) We anticipate processing new words every 20
or so items ingested into the library to make the job much
easier to handle.

call me w any questions.  I know Prabhawati who has been
instrumental in the Vocabulary list process would both
benefit and contribute if she can participate in our
planning calls.

I hope you have survived the heat.

-- Peace रमेश् jono
