4/18/78 darshan

There are 62 chakras, 20 main ones, 10 in head and 10 in body.

(In this yuga is it okay to teach even though you don’t have perfect knowledge?)   People are doing it.   (That wasn’t the question.)   If you don’t know completely, then how can you teach [Babaji’s question]?   (You teach by your mistakes also.)   You teach to learn, not to be a teacher.   (And that’s okay?)   Then you and the student are the same.

Doctors can’t give life.   We can learn how to live in a healthy way.

(Potentizing or “purifying” a homeopathic remedy removes all the original substance, leaves only subtle essence…….)   The energy remains, even though the substance is gone.   For instance, nux bhomika is purified by a milk sugar pill.   It looses its form and the energy is absorbed by the sugar pill.   (It doesn’t lose everything.)   Suppose an herb is used as a powder.   Its powder can be done 1000 times.   Long pepper seeds are energized like that.   You put pinewood with sandalwood for 24 hours, and then you take away the pinewood and it will take sandalwood essence (and smell) with it.   If nothing remains [of the original substance], then it can’t work.   

(Is there one avatar at a time, or for a yuga, or....?)   Avatar in modern sense means one who know the link of past and present, which means who never died.   The body died but not the person’s consciousness.   In that sense there are several avatars.

(Healing on physical level as opposed to subtle level…….)   The healing of the consciousness is the real healing.   Medicines can’t heal the consciousness.   (Can consciousness heal the body?)   Yes.   (How does Western medicine heal the body at all?)   The body is a mechanism which can be healed.   The consciousness is not within their reach.

(Spontaneous cure of cancer by person’s own resistance…….)   The body mechanism can cure by itself.   Several people have cancer and they don’t know about it, and they live a long life.   Several dying people lose fear and then they get well.

(Trick for getting job…?)   Face prospective employer with predominant nostril side (slightly).   [not Babaji’s exact words]

