3/31/76 darshan, first day of Easter Retreat, paraphrased Fear at beginning of Samadhi is of losing the world.
Anger is to be given up (not felt), but may need to be shown.

Negative forces (energies) are within, only appearing to come from outside if they are attacking during meditation. Released by meditation. We choose what we see.

There exist purity, activity, and inertia.  4/2/76: All three are needed, in a balance.

Question about calamities at the start of the path: The cup breaks. When Babaji started yoga, his father died.

True bhakti comes only after jnana: knowing God automatically means loving God. Before that (without jnana), there can be devotion,, but it does not know its object.


4/1/76 darshan

When a prisoner accepts the prison, he is not in prison.

Air predominant person can’t relate to the world and the people in it well. Marijuana makes him crazy. Air humor relates to the emotions. Air predominant person doesn’t want to be here (and this is good). He is more susceptible, can’t have much sun or moon.

Best not to eat after midnight. This is why we “break fast.” Best to eat shortly before noon (10 AM) and after sunset, because bile is most active at those times.


4/2/76 darshan

Women are stronger emotionally, men physically. For self defense of each. Women have sattvic emotional energy that is much greater, stronger, than men’s. (Other emotions are from samskaras.) The weakest woman can conquer the strongest man.

Ignorance is the cause of evolution, of the world existing. Expansion in the world stops with enlightenment. There is no desire.

Soul consciousness begins when mind consciousness leaves off or stops. It is not the mind that knows the soul, but the superconsciousness that does.

Not being attached to one’s actions is play (which follows from being happy).

Atma Richard Timan: The monk is the person with dispassion, whether living in the world or not. Babaji: Can dress like a monk but be worldly.


4/4/76 satsang (Easter Sunday)

Question mentioning path of least resistance: Path of least resistance is to overcome samskaras with effort. Resistance = samskaras.

The samskaras cover the soul.

The soul is not affected by any of our sufferings = our own true Self = God. People show their devotion in different ways.

Going to any expert is natural: parent for child, guru for aspirant, electrician for householder with broken TV.

Knowledge of the Self, identification of the Self, is the fourth samadhi stage.

Aura extends four fingers’ width from the body normally, further in emotional states. Predominant color indicated predominant element in body. Brightness indicates health, positive quality.
Earth: intellect (or lack)	 yellow		tamas Water: emotion (or negative)	milky white		 rajas Fire:	 pride (or lack)	 red		 rajas Air:	wisdom (or lack)		greenish blue rajas Ether: devotion (or lack)	 sky blue	sattva