12/4/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	Is it all right to cry in sādhana?   
B:	Yoga and viyoga = union and separation.  In bhakti both come.   When there is separation there is sadness.  But the sadness is different.  Your crying is not for the attaining of any worldly object.  It’s only for the feeling of separation.  It’s a natural process of purifying the nerve channels.  But the mind can trick very easily.  For example, one gets angry with his wife and sits alone and says he has dispassion.

B:	Muscle stiffness in neck caused by fifteen rounds of bhramarī daily will go away.

B:  	Devotion and dispassion increase concentration without methods.   
Q:	Until there is consciousness only of your aim, God, peace.   
B:	In the highest state of dispassion, a yogi doesn’t desire even to breathe, and the result is samādhi.  The result of samādhi is dispassion, and dispassion brings samādhi.

B:	Dispassion is when the mind stops desiring.

B:  	In bhakti yoga the mind is surrendered to the Lord.  All the desires are diverted toward the Lord.  That is dispassion.   
R:	There is desire only for God.  There is always duality in bhakti yoga: the lover and the beloved.   When the dualism is stopped, that is complete liberation.   
Q:	What is nirvana?
B:	Liberation.   
Q:	Outside the realm of four yugas?   
B:	The four yugas are for the world.  They are a time of creation, expansion, and destruction.  In liberation, you are going beyond this.   
Q:	What form does one have after liberation?   
B:	It’s not easy to conceive it when we have no experience.   Still, by reading and hearing definitions we can imagine it.   What is nirvāṇa?  When all the saṃskāra have been rooted out and there is no chance of their sprouting again.  That is nirvāṇa.

Q:	Feeling of insect crawling on head during trāṭaka.   
B:	Concentration.  When the mind is fixed, energy rises up….  Can be felt in different parts of body.

B:	Chant Oṃ eleven times for five jñānendriya, five karmendriya, and manas = the eleven rudra.      

Q:	Physical and mental effects of fasting?   
B:	For purification of the body.  Effects depend on length and person.   If a person doesn’t need to fast, it can harm the body.  If a person is air-predominant, it can also harm if the fasting is done for more than three days…
R:	… a long fast 
B:	… with juices.  If the person is bile-predominant and long fast is done, it can also harm.  You should not fast if you’re losing weight quickly.   

B:	Nature of air-predominant type is libidinous, and progeny is variable [according to a written description that was read].

B:	Ujjāyī eliminates phlegm, mucus in bronchial tubes.

B: 	Overweight people can fast fifteen days with juices.  Possibilities:  juices, nothing for a day, fruit for a month, milk for fifteen days, half of regular diet for a month.

Q:	For persistent post-nasal drip?  
B:	Trikaṭu [original note was trikuta]: four parts anise seed, one part black pepper, three parts ginger, two parts brown sugar.  One teaspoon after meals with hot water, up to twice a day.   Stop taking wheat for five days also. 

B:	Avoid overeating after fast.

B:	Americans either think of food or think of fast, both in extremes.  Must eat right food, proper proportions, right time.

B:  	Our body creates a resisting power when an accident is about to happen.  People can get deep cuts in battle and feel no pain, and it heals itself in a day.   
Q:	How do we lose this power?   
B:	By losing our natural way of living.  We can see in the dark, but now we have electric lights, so we can’t.  With naked feet we can walk without stepping on thorns, but with naked feet now we will step on thorns.

Q:	Reports of body changing at time of initiation by Muktānanda, or Dhyāna Yogi.   
B:	Can be from emotion or expectation.  We expect a ghost and a bush becomes a ghost.   Or the emotions are triggered and a feeling comes.  Like a young man who likes a woman touches her hand and gets a feeling.  It’s emotion.  Someone else can touch her hand and nothing happens. 

Q:	Is it possible for a yogi to transmit śakti?   
B:	Yes.  But a person immediately awakens.   Awakens here and sleeps there, no.   
Q:	Awakening and then falling back?   
B:	If a one gets trapped in the world again.  When a person’s kuṇḍalinī awakens, which is also called śaktipāta, the condition is like a drunk for several days.  When the intoxication calms down, the person never again desires the world.

B:	Swami Viṣṇudevānanda [spelling?] was a high siddha.  He could give life to dead animals, which he showed several times.  His body created an energy field which people could feel, but when they would go home they would become as they were.

B:	Most difficult thing in yoga sādhana: to calm the mind.  It is said one can keep a mustard seed on the tip of a bull’s horn, but it is difficult to keep the mind on one object. 

Q:	Justice?   
B:	Law and lawyers are created by the collective mind.  Individually we know what is right.   Justice is when the right and wrong appear separate, in their pure form.


