10/2/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship 

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	How come yoga teaches that we all have separate karmas?   
A:	We don’t feel one.  As long as we don’t feel oneness, we have to work individually.  We are one in the subtle level.  In the gross level, we are not.  We see so many bodies.  We don’t see one, and it is not one.  But in the subtle level we all are one.  As long as we don’t identify ourselves to that state of oneness, we can’t feel one.  But it doesn’t mean there is no oneness.   One doesn’t see India.  It doesn’t mean India isn’t there.

Q:	How to find out one’s past?   
A:	By watching one’s thoughts, desires, actions in the present.

Babaji:  Laya yoga [has] 35,000 methods.  Most important:  nāda yoga and meditation on light.   Laya yoga is a method to dissolve the mind in between an object and its obstruction.  We use sound as a medium or object of meditation.  Then sound itself becomes an obstruction.   Laya is not a faint.   
R.	In some places it is described as fainting.

B:	Can read a maṇḍala as can read a book and attain knowledge from the symbolism.  Each line, geometric pattern, color, has meaning.  It explains how the energy is flowing and is created.  

Q:	How to strengthen will power to overcome laziness and do meditation?   
A:	No way out but to kick yourself every morning.

B:	When ego is used to develop spiritual practice, it’s positive.  When spirituality is used as an ego, it’s negative.

B:	Competition as a reason to do more sādhana is okay so long as it does not harm another’s practice.

B:	All meditating together can use the same method, but each is different.  People can pick up from others, meditating together, but it is not the same.

B:	Mantras, meditation, prāṇāyāma, and mudrās are used in tantric meditation on maṇḍalas.   First you see the whole thing, then gradually bring the sight to center.  Gross form gradually disappears.

B:	You can pick up your own illusion [unclear if these words were Babaji’s or the questioner’s].   Sometimes we pick up the negativity of others, and sometimes it’s our own negativity which we project.

Q:	How to purify negative energy?   
A:	By using certain mantras.  By meditation on the positive.  By realizing that you are not related to that energy.   
Q:	If we pick up negativity?   
A:	Substitute positive.  By creating positivity, you develop positive saṃskaras.  It becomes easier the next time.

B:	One can be alone among people.  To be in the world and not in the world is a very high stage.   His attachments are stopped.

B:	Your own projected creation is your world, which is the cause of pleasure and pain.  World doesn’t mean earth, ocean, rivers, trees.

Q:	Why is there pain?   
A:	It is a part of life.  Like night and day.  In fact, there is neither pain nor pleasure.   There is only our understanding that this is pain and this is pleasure.  Some understand more pain and less pleasure.  Some understand more pleasure and less pain.  Some go beyond both.   
Q:	Can some look on getting broken bones as a pleasurable experience?   
A:	Some can.  There was a saint [missed name] who fell and his thigh was pierced by a tree.  He was found after some days, and no anesthetic was used when his infected leg was cut.  He was as cheerful as ever.   
Q:	Babies experience pain and pleasure from birth….   
A:	Saṃskāras.   

B:	Can’t let go without having control.  First develop control over your attachments.

Q:	Will there be a continuity of awareness after death?   
A:	Yes, we will have that saṃskāra, print of actions, from this life.  But we can’t see it because there is veil of ignorance.  Those who die by removing that veil know everything about the past. 
B:	One can change anything by changing one’s beliefs, if one’s will is strong enough.  It applies to everything, but it is hardest in practicality.

Q:	Yoga methods for control over negative desires?   
A:	Prāṇāyāma is best method.  Mind is purified.

B:	Anger, hate, and jealousy are all part of anger.  Anger and fear are two sides of same coin.  All are eliminated when mind is purified.

B:	For a long fast, one should do lighter sādhana.

B:	When the mind is calm, posture… 
R:	… sitting 
B:	… will be calm by itself.

B:	Main thing is to eliminate disturbances in everyday life.   Each person’s disturbances are caused by different saṃskāras and situations.   Situations are easy to change.   For saṃskāras we have to do sādhana.

Q:	Stealing.   
A:	When there is a need, people do such things, forgetting good and evil.

Q:	Doesn’t realizing the oneness make a person want to work in government and politics to improve life for all?   
A:	No.  It is not possible to make the world better in politics.  Gandhi [Mohanadāsa Karamacaṃda Gāṃdhī (Mahātmā)] introduced ahiṃsā, made a few saints, but the world did not change.   
Q:	Didn’t the British leave India as a result?   
A:	Politics did not change.  Gāṃdhī was one of the main causes of the British leaving.   There was great resistance all over India and the British had no way to change it, so they left.

B:  	There is one natural control of population.  Stop famine, war will come out.  Stop war, disease will come out.   
Q:	Birth control?   
A:	It is also a part of nature, and developed by nature’s force.   
Q:	Fatalistic?   
A:	We do not depend on fate.  When we are hungry we eat.  We don’t wait for fate to feed us.   Fate has its own limits.  Effort has its own limits.  We can do certain things up to a certain extent.  No one changed the whole world.  There were always floods, famines, wars, disease.
[Could the first sentence here have been misrecorded?  Babaji might actually have said, or meant to say, “There is not one natural control of population.”   Or he might not have said, or not meant to say, “one.”   But if recorded correctly, then “one” seems to mean something like “generic” or “inevitable.”] 

[According to Hamsa Robin Heinrich, Babaji said American saṃskāras are householder saṃskāras and it is best to get those desires out of the way in order to get on with sādhana.]
    


