4/24/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Also, it is like that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


[Missed first Q’s and A’s.  Probably Ma Renu Ruth Horsting and perhaps Baba Narendra Dass (BND) took earlier April notes, as well as notes from the beginning today.]

B:	… has no form.  In avidyā kṣetra it is yellow, in vidyā kṣetra it is bright.
	Viśṇu cakra is yellow.   Rudra [cakra] is dark.  Black but not really black.  Pencil [graphite?] colored.  Śrī cakra has very much detail.  It is a symbol of the whole creation.  But as a center of energy we explain it as having the radiance of a thousand suns.

Q:	Relation between prakṛti, kuṇḍalinī, śakti?   
B:	Three names of same thing.  According to different functions we give them different names.   Śakti is the name when creation starts.  Kuṇḍalinī is the name when all the cakra are created and the energy stays in a dormant state in the lowest cakra.   Kula and ākula are two different places.   Kula is in mūlādhāra.  Akula is in ājṇā where the śakti is supposed to meet.   The full name is kulakuṇḍalinī, coiled śakti.  Prakṛti is the function of creation and the thing created, its nature.  So śakti is first, prakṛti is second, and kuṇḍalinī is third.   
Q:	A single name?   
B:	Kālī, Durgā, Tārā are single names.  There are ten Mahāvidyā, the same but their function is different depending on the guṇas.

B:	In meditation, can choose any of sixteen energy centers for concentration.  Best to concentrate on one and get perfection in it.   If you do cakra bhedana, you use all six in ascending order…
R:	… piercing them
B:	… and descending order.
R:	… taking the energy back down.

B:	The concentrator is ājñā.  Thinking that you are concentrating somewhere else is simply a trick to arrest the mind.  Ājñā is cakra where manas is situated (mind, recording faculty), which connects us from outside.

Q:	After someone dies, will he feel love that is sent to him mentally?   
B:	Whether or not he does, you do, and that is good.   If we say dead, what do we mean?  
Q:	If dead, how can you pray to him?   
B:	The ātman, embodied soul, never dies.  The saṃskāra which wrap it can be contacted.

B:	When the mind checks itself… 
R:	… in meditation 
B:	… then you lose it.
R:	… the meditation.
    
Q:	Is there any difference between God and a God-realized being?   
B:	We identify God in a God-realized being.  It is said in the Rāmāyaṇa and also in the Bible:  One who knows You becomes You.  But God is one and can’t be two.  Just as a shadow in a mirror is not you, but shows you.

Q:	Purpose of our life?   
B:	To get out of the darkness.   
Q:	How?   
B:	To get out of the darkness is our nature.  But it is also our nature to run toward the other side.  So this battle goes on.

Q:	How can we recognize our saṃskāra in this life?   
B:	Our thoughts, desires, actions are saṃskāra.   What we desire, what we think, how we act.   These are good and bad both.

B:	Mantras:
   	personal mantras:
       		one syllable
      		three syllables
       		four to nine:  bīja
   	mantras which can be general:
       		ten to twenty:  mantra
       		twenty plus:  mālā
	Sometimes a mantra that is bīja is given as a personal mantra even though it has more than ten syllables.  Oṃ or any name of God would be considered a general mantra.  In each mantra there is one seed syllable.  A seed syllable is a sound coming from a particular cakra.

B:  	America is pātāla loka according to Hindu scriptures, the lowest of the nether world.   Story that Mandodarī’s father ruled the loka that is America.   He invented the airplane.   He fought in the Mahābhārata battle.  
Q:	Where was it?   
B:	I think North and South America.  What the geography  was like at that time we can’t tell.   In that battle the king had an army of elephants.  Now there are no elephants here.

B:	A teacher can tell where someone should concentrate in meditation, after seeing the body humor.
R:	… and nature.   
B:	Some people can’t meditate on ājñā.  They get angry, irritable, depressed.  They can meditate on anāhata or maṇipūra.  It is better to do some breathing exercises at first and then watching the breath.  When you can keep attention on breath…
R:	… following it down to maṇipūra, 
B:	… then attention switches to anāhata automatically.  The center of prāṇa, of the five prāṇas, is anāhata.  At anāhata, concentrate on its details, or on mantra, or bliss, or a twelve-finger-width flame.  Concentration…
	[followed by a question mark in the original notes, so conceivably Babaji actually said “meditation” instead] 
	… is mantra, bliss, and concentration together.

B: 	Some people need outer objects, something to stare at or meditate upon.  It is easier to concentrate with an object outside.   It should not be so bright that it hurts the eyes.  If a god, then one should know his qualities, symbolic and spiritual and historic meaning.     

B: 	If a chess player who concentrates to win turned his aim to God, then he wouldn’t see the chessboard.  Artists can go very deep and paint.  If they have an aim to find God, they can concentrate through their art easily.   In India it was a yoga method once:  sculpting, painting.  Still in the Nāga sect… 
	[this was “nada” followed by a question mark, in the original handwritten notes] 
	… they do sewing.

B:	In Chinese medicine, water from stalk of banana tree can be poured into ear to heal wound or remove mucus.

Q:	What is love?   
B:	It is a feeling which is not polluted by any desire.   
Q:	Can love be “directed”?   
B:	Love, and love with attachment: two kinds.  Love with attachment can be shown and directed.   But real love is a light that shines by itself.   
Q:	How can one overcome attachment?   
B:	By sādhana.  Without attachment we can’t function in the world.  But if we understand our attachments, we can’t get tricked by them.

B: 	Mantra is effective by sound and by faith and devotion.  If you repeat some word that has a bad meaning, it will affect you in a bad way.

Q:	Which is more harmful, verbal assault or physical assault?   
B:	Sometimes one, sometimes the other.   The sound of a verbal assault can hurt very badly, even kill.  There are six mantras to hurt others.  A person with these can kill, make crazy, cause depression, overpower.

Q:	If someone recognizes his attachments, he won’t be tricked by them?   
B:	If you see the rope in the snake, you won’t be scared.   
R: 	And maybe jump from a cliff to get away from it.   
Q:  	Can you still climb on it?   
B:	That is the only time you can.  When we don’t understand our attachments and something happens, then we get pain, lose our understanding, and act as stupid.  If we know our attachments, we will still get pain but we will accept it and keep our mental balance.   
Q:	Why do we remain attached?   
B:	It is our nature.  Ignorance.  Attachment, stupidity, activity.  Anger, hate, jealousy.  If you understand attachment, you will see all negativity very clearly.

B:  	When a sadhu, through sādhana, develops dispassion, then he sees mara like demons attacking.   Before, he can’t see it because he is in it.   When you are separated, you can see it.   
Q:	Can there be a positive result to attachment if you are aware of it?   
B:	Yes.  Attachment is a very important part of life.   If we are ignorant of it, then it always causes pain.  We know we will die.  But if we think on our death then we are scared, because we do not realize our attachment to this body.
	When you knock your toe on a rock, then you begin to see the ground.  We all learn like that.   
Q:	By seeing that we have acted stupidly due to attachment.   
B:	But if we again don’t try to see, we will go on getting knocks and someday there will be no toe.

Q:	What is the right attitude to take to a newly dead close friend or relative?   
B:	Prayer.   For peace.

Q:	How to find the guru within?   
B:	By going in.   The guru is sitting inside and you are looking outside – how can you find it?!   To find him inside you have to go inside, stop all the activities of the senses, sit peacefully, concentrate on the heart.  Then you will see him.

Q:	If scared of our aloneness?   
B:	It is a fear of death, which comes in our mind in various ways.  Feeling alone is a very good thing.   It develops dispassion.  But in a person who is attached to the world, it develops loneliness, which is frightening.   If you honestly see it, then you will see that we are always alone on the inner level.   Only physically do we create a support by attachment.   
R:	To make ourselves think we are not always alone.

R:	Short story of Babaji’s about māyā wrapping paper on gifts:  Just don’t be afraid when troubles beset you and your life seems to be coming apart. 




