
10/16/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


B:	Part of our life is in the world.  We can’t [therefore] renounce everything [not Babaji’s exact words]. 

B:	In the worldly level, love is attachment and includes several expectations.  When love is without expectations, then it is without attachment.   

Q:	How to become less judgmental?   
A:	By not comparing yourself with others.  If you accept yourself, then you will not compare.   I can’t be six feet tall.   If I accept that I am 5’ 5” I will stop comparing myself with six foot tall people.

Q:	Rocking to and fro?   
A:	A way to engage the mind in some action.  Accepted in some cultures.

B:	Problems will come up and become ready to be worked out, of themselves.  Like pouring water.   It fills and overflows.   

B:	By sādhana our past life which is in dormant stage comes to the surface and starts pouring out.   It burns.  

B:	A yogi, whenever stops his effort [double check this against others’ notes], is called śura, brave.   We are dealing with our saṃskāra of the past, which is vast.  Sometimes we feel we were better in the past.  It is the same pouring out of saṃskāra, reducing saṃskāra.

B:	If thoughts that come uncontrollably are not acted out, it will not make reprints, and eventually will die out.  Action makes saṃskāra.  A thought comes like a plant.  If you don’t water it by actions, it will not grow.

B:	Breathing practices unbalance the energies in the body and create experiences and visions of gods.  But in time they level out and the practices are helpful.

Q:	Is it good sādhana to meditate on one’s own death?   
A:	It is one of the methods.  A person meditates as if looks from above at his dead body lying on the ground.  It is witnessing your death of ignorance.

B:	Meat is not the natural food for humans who live in a place where grain is available.  In tundra regions they have to, and it is part of natural population control of the animals.  The poison of the meat is not good for those not meant to eat meat.  If a deer eats meat he will get a disease.

B:	To get rid of boils, garlic poultice.  Mix paste of garlic with wheat flour, add milk, then water, thin like…..[missed], then cook it down till thick like porridge, add a little salt.  It will soak out the pus.

B:	To align upper spine, spiral twist, toe touch, half moon, in sequence.  Stiff neck and shoulders can be due to excess air.  Eat dryish grains.

Q:	To clean out excess mucus in nose, besides cutting out dairy?   
A:	Sūtra netī, also agnisāra dhautī.

B:	Hang nails on fingers happen when children grow.

B:	If doing prāṇāyāma, need ghee and butter to replace some of the mucus burned.

Q:	If doing chanting to open throat chakra?   
A:	Eat light foods, mostly fruit.   [This advice was to a particular individual.]

Q:	Foods to make one jolly?   
A:	If you are not constipated, you will be jolly.

Q:	Concentration in sādhana?  
B:	On anāhata or ājñā.

B:	Milk is a tridoṣa food.
R:	… humors are balanced.  
B:	Yogurt is pitta food, cheese kapha-predominant.

B:  Some animals are more intelligent than others and get more attached to each other.  Some have no sense of attachment and live alone.  Their attachment is not as in humans.  We understand it more, they by instinct.   
R:	Including mating for life in some.

B:  Children always argue…
R.	… with each other 
A:	… because they have so much energy.  It comes out by playing, yelling, screaming, arguing.  We also did.

We are responsible for the world or society.  We can’t ignore everything.  If the room is dirty we have to clean it.

B:  In olden times the sages used soma, but they knew everything about it, who should use, at what time and place, in what quantity.   
Q:	At what time?   
A:	When the right element is predominating in the body.

[Missed something about śāmbhavī mudrā]



