12/11/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	Goal of yoga and activity of enlightened soul?   
B:	Ātman dwells in its own light, not polluted by any confusion or doubts.

B:	Impurities are reduced by yoga sādhana or by developing positive qualities.   

Q:	Use of marijuana?   
B:	Poison kills, poison cures.   Depends on how you use it.   
Q:	How to use it?   
B:	Don’t know, never used it.   
Q:	Useful in meditation….
B:	You can meditate without it so why lean on something?  In yoga, chemical means are accepted for enlightenment but not for complete enlightenment, also it must be decided who should take, when, how much, etc.   

Q:	You must return to the womb and find out who is going to be your mother in your next life….   
B:	I already know.   
Q:	Who?   
B:	Not here.

B:	Gāyatrī mantra is supposed not to be recited in front of people.   A whole book, Gāyatrī, explains its meaning.

Q:	At home when mind starts to wander in meditation?  
B:	Take three sips of water and start over.  Again the mind will go out after some time.  The water breaks the chain of coming thoughts and also reminds you to concentrate.

Q:	What is a spiritual marriage and how does one attain this?   
B:	Marriage is always spiritual because there are vows of surrendering to each other.   The real witnesses of a marriage are the five elements.   When two people marry in such a ceremony, they cannot separate [not Babaji’s exact words].  

B:	Illusion starts when Prakṛti and Puruṣa get together and start functioning.   It is the nature of evolution.   Why it happens no one can tell, because the creation makes a chain in this matter. 
Q:	Attachment is necessary in marriage, and jealousy of infidelity.   
B:	Marriage means to be one.  If they relate to others in that way, then they can’t be one.   
Q:	Shouldn’t everyone be one?   
B:	Then why marry? [Babaji’s question]   
Q:	Ownership starts with marriage….  
B:	You are in the level where you need ownership.  You have not renounced the world.  It’s not an imaginary thing…. When we are here we need to wear clothes.  Can’t say we are born naked so don’t need to wear clothes.  Why did you wear clothes to come here? [Babaji’s question]  
Q:	They wouldn’t let us come here if we didn’t.   
B:	So you accept society.

B:	Silence is a method to save prāṇa energy, which is used for yoga sādhana.  Silence, vow not to talk, reduces thoughts because otherwise we spend lots of time thinking of things we’re going to say [not Babaji’s exact words].

Q:	Is meditation absolutely necessary for ultimate realization of the ātman?
B:	Yes.  The mind should be calm in order to attain enlightenment.  That calm is meditation? [Babaji’s question]   Freeing the mind from thought.   
R:	Concentration is to narrow the thoughts to one, then that one is eliminated.

Q:	Why would one renounce the company of people to attain oneness?   
B:	Not important to.  It is one of the ways.   
Q:	What is ultimate way?  
B:	Freeing the mind from thoughts?  There is no one way.  One can free one’s mind of thoughts in a city by not putting the mind in the city.  One can live in the woods with his mind in the city.  If one is in a spiritual path one gets higher [than very gross level] and can do it.  If you are not in that physical level, you can’t feel it.  You are speaking from the physical level only.  You live in the woods and pollute the woods.  

Q:	Mantra to cleanse out evil thought…?   
B:	Any name of God will do.  Or prāṇāyāma.

B:	Nāda yoga sound:  listen for its echo, which is subtle.  The sound will get subtler and subtler, and some day it can bring samādhi.  

Q:	Meditation can derange energy and cause body jerks.   
B:	Okay because it proves you were concentrating.  Sound, jerk, and light come together or separately.

B:  	Meditation is our natural tendency, but it is covered by negativities.  In meditation, we only remove the obstacles, we don’t make meditation.  The obstacles are thoughts.   
R:	Negative ones first, then positive ones.   
Q:	What is negative?   
B:	Thoughts which cause pain, fear,…. 

B:	Complete surrender and anger are not possible [not Babaji’s exact words].

Q:	Is meditation the way to deal with negativities?   
B:	It is one of the ways.   
Q:	Others?   
B:	Dwell on the positive.   
R:	Mechanical at first, replacing negative thoughts with positive.

B:	Theresa Neumann’s stigmata could be due to emotion, or a siddhi, or to being a saint.  Some pierce their bodies with spears and walk several miles to worship.  Due to emotion they feel no pain, and when their worship is over the wound heals itself.

Q:	Why do so many spiritual people die at a young age?   
B:	Death is a part of life.  When the saṃskāras to live are completed, they leave.  
Q:	Where do they go?   
B:	Where they go is according to their saṃskāra.

Q:	Are humans basically evil?   
B:	The world is not evil.  We make it evil by our negativity.  

Q:	Better when walking down the street to use a mantra or just by will power try to keep thoughts quiet?   
B:	Mantra helps.

