9/11/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


B:	Confusion is created by the mind’s being disturbed.  Meditate every day to eliminate this. Aim 
R:	… to attain peace, for instance 
B:	… and object 
R:	… of concentration
B:	… are necessary. 

Q:	Vipāśana [sic] meditation. 
B:	Sanskrit word for meditation with concentration on breath, a method of rāja yoga.  Upāsānā means meditation with an attitude of worship. 

B:	Meditation on any of sāttvika qualities in a special pūjā:  Flower is a symbol of manas. In pūjā, we imagine flower contains a positive quality, then offer it to God. 

Q:	Cause of a disturbed mind? 
B:	Inherited from past life. 
R:	We seek out situations that develop that saṃskāra. 
B:	Its cure is to develop quality of channeling the mind toward a particular object that has a positive quality.  It’s a method.  The aim is to attain peace . Could concentrate simply on sun, moon, trees, grass, river, ocean, anything with quality of serenity. 

B:	Mind can get trapped in enjoyment of music as object of concentration. In nada yoga, when melodious sounds appear, the rule is to switch (away from that). 

B:	Sādhana is mechanical until results are felt.  Then faith develops and the practices are no longer mechanical. 

Q:	Dwelling on opposite whenever a negative thought overpowers the mind. 
A:	That is yama and niyama. We can do it all the time. Because negative thoughts come all the time. 

[Missing question]
B:	Same rituals as used for a birth. 

Q:	Regarding pain. 
B:	Look for its cause, then for how much of it you create and how much is real.  When you go on researching, you will discover it is all self-created. 

B:	Fear is based on death.  We all will die and we all fear it.  If we accept the life with its cycle of birth, growth, decay, and death, then we will not fear it. 

Q:	Does soul of person who has just died continue to communicate with us? 
B:	For some time the desire of the dead person keeps the soul hovering near.  For that time, prayers are felt by the saṃskāra body.  In the case of suicide, or battles, it can hover longer. 
Q:	Hovers around body or place of death? 
B:	It wants the body in same house, town, country.  The place of attachment.  Subtle body turns into a seed, leaving physical body and taking all saṃskāra with it. 
Q: 	How are subtle and physical bodies attached in life? 
B:	By the mind.  By a saṃskāra.  That is why we don’t want to die.  Weight of saṃskāra keeps subtle body attached to physical body, like tea in a cup.  When it leaves it gets lighter and lighter, and can’t resist the pull from the opposite side.  That’s why it is said that the guards of the Lord of Death pull the soul away, that nothing can prevent this. 

B:	In astral travel, the subtle body remains connected to the physical body by cord of desire to return. 

B:	Signs of approaching death appear at three years, one year, six months, one month, thirteen days, three days, and can be read by someone who is able. 

B:	People who die with no saṃskāra left = mukta = liberated ones.  Have attained nirvikalpa samādhi. 
R:	At this stage one can remain alive without making plans, without feeling that he is the doer, surrendering.  The body is alive, with an ego. With no ego, the body dies.  If the ego is completely eliminated, then the body will not exist.  Also, in surrendering, there is someone who surrenders.

B:	Possession can only happen to a living body by a hovering soul, the body of which has died. That person starts acting differently and people say they are possessed by a ghost.  It happens when a person is sick or frightened, weakened in some way.  There are mantras and a complete tantric ritual to exorcise the ghost, free the person. 

B:	After liberation, the body ego remains.  When its time is over, then the person is liberated on all levels.  In the meantime he will still get sick and die, because of karma the body has to go through. 

B:	Hariakhan Baba has perfect control over five elements.  The five elements in purest state are ether, can be dissolved into it and reformed out of it. 

B:	Dying is a cycle of life.  You are released from one stage into another stage of life.  Like leaving an old coat and putting on a new one.  But we don’t see or feel this because of our attachment to the old coat. 

[Unclear speaker]:  Babaji lived in a burial ground for fifteen years, saw real possession, knows much about ghosts. Children can tell ghost stories and when one touches another’s foot and screams and faints, it can get possessed. 
R:	Not good to create ghost in own mind and get frightened. Fragmentation of personality, or imitation of someone else, can look like possession but is less horrible.  This is different from the above real example. 

B:	Hariakhan Baba is not his body.  If you make dolls and break them, the doll does not get saṃskāra.  Hariakhan Baba does sādhana. 

B:	You can’t get something by doing nothing.  Sādhana means we have to do. 

Q:	Dreams that come true. 
B:	We all are in present, past, or future in saṃskāra.  Can flash and glimpse future in waking state or in a dream. 



