7/24/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


B:	Sadhus in India who don’t beg go to āśramas in order to eat.  In India it is an accepted thing, but in Western culture people are expected to work to earn a livelihood [not Babaji’s words].

B:	Squashes are air-predominant often.

Q:  	How can we love God more?   
B:	By loving God’s creation.  God is not A, B, C.  God is everything.  If you want to love him by fixing a form and name, then it is not complete.  God and his creation are not separate.

Q:	Proper amount to eat?   
B:	According to yoga, the limit is two palms’ full.
R:	… at a sitting.  
B:	Twice a day is enough for the body.

B:	Wheat, rice, and lentils are good grains to eat.

B:	Do agnisāra dhautī to relieve stiffness in the morning by creating heat.  

B:	If you make a habit of eating…
R:	… only
B:	… certain foods which you can digest, then the mind will start forgetting the craving for other foods.

Q:	Grains make a person more grounded, fruits more spaced out.   
B:	Body needs fruits, vegetables, grains, oils.

Q:	Does the soul learn anything between death and the next birth?   
B:	To learn we need the mind with its instrument, the brain.  With death the brain dies and the mind becomes a saṃskāra.   
R:	So it’s a static state?   
B:	It’s another dream.  In a dream you don’t go anywhere but you feel.   
R:	Same cycle of joys, pains, desires?  They are reflected in dreams.   
B:	There is deep sleep also.  One can be in a dream and one can be in a deep sleep.

B:	It is hard to become an animal again after a human birth.  Being reborn is a pravṛtti process, not hard.

Q:	How can you tell when the ego is talking and when the soul?   
B:	The soul never talks.   Always it’s an ego.  But when the ego is sāttvika… 
R:	… pure and at peace, 
B:	… then we identify it with the soul.   

Q:	Women sitting on one side, men on the other, why?   
B:	It looks good.  If there is a system, there is less confusion.    
R:	It’s easier to remember why you’re here.

Q:	What to do for too much mucus suddenly?   
B:	Make a tea of licorice root, black pepper, anise seed.  Drink in morning for some days.

Q:	People’s inability to make decisions, being [pushed] around by others’ wishes and projections……   
B:	It is from nervousness or a fear of being wrong.  It becomes a habit.  When a person is obstructed a few times from giving decisions, a fear develops.  To break this fear you have to make decisions without worrying about whether it’s wrong or right.  From worry the mind gets so deeply involved in itself that you can’t give a decision.   
R:	Emotions overwhelm reason.
[I used to get unable to speak.]

Q:	Possible to merge into God?   
B:	If you try.   
Q:	How?   
B:	Develop positive qualities.   
Q: 	If sad or angry, ignore it?   
B:	Can’t ignore it because the negativity is deep-rooted.  In words it’s easy to say: “Develop positivity.”  But in practicality, it’s as big as Mount Everest.  You have to purify your thoughts, actions, and words all the time.   
	1)  By watching yourself.   
	2)  By doing sādhana.   
	3)  By making an aim that you will not hurt anyone by your thoughts, actions, words.   
R:	Sādhana is methods to discipline the body and mind.

Q:	How not to store impression of someone’s directing negativity toward oneself?
B:	You have to be so strong that you will feel as though someone is abusing you in Chinese.   
Q:	Praise also?   
B:	Yes.

Q:	Feeling for periods of time that everyone loves you and then that everyone hates you.   
B:	Fear of being rejected.  First thing is to purify yourself, then all of those things will fall away by themselves.  Root is impurities in the mind.   
Q:	Body also?   
B:	Body is a gross part of the mind.
R:	Directly connected by organs of sense and action.   
Q:	Are humors directly connected to emotions?   
B:	Yes.  

Q:	Hours of sleep the body requires?   
B:	For babies, or children [?], 12.  
	For growing people, 8.  
	For people who’ve finished growing, 6.  
	For yogis, 4.  
	For enlightened people, nil.

Q:	Purpose of life?   
B:	To get rid of the confusion of life.

B:	OṂ = three creative energies:  sattva, rajas, tamas
	MAṆI PADME = Śiva 
	HŪṂ = NAMAḤ = NAMASKĀRA = offering obeisance to that, 
	so same as OṂ NAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA
	[The final Ṃ’s are nasal, like NG with silent G.]

Q:	Have you known many of us in previous lives?   
B:	There’s no proof.   
R:  	He says so.

Q:	Not able to visualize……   
B:	Concentrate on that void.   
Q:	Go into the darkness?   
B:	Yes.  That darkness is also a light.

Q:	Not wanting to be in the body or the soul.   
B:	Paravairāgya.
R:	… supreme dispassion   
B:	That state of dispassion is a samādhi.  The body can’t function.   
R:	You have no body.

Q:	Trouble meditating.   
B:	Learning prāṇāyāma will help.

Q:	Picking up others’ thoughts and feelings happens when there is less ego, Babaji has said.   [And thus participating in others’ games.]   
B:	In the process of purification, the mind becomes more receptive to negativity.   
R:	Because its nature is pravṛtti and the process is against that, is nivṛtti.   
B:	But when one practices regularly, that slipping process stops.

Q:	How to practice being unaffected by praise or blame without becoming oblivious to other people?   
B:	Through regular sādhana, that state of mind and the ability to deal with it come gradually.   There are several ups and downs.

B:	Without night, you can’t identify day.  Day and night.  You have two things to identify each other.

B:	Accepting both is the highest stage.  Accepting is different from expressing.  When one accepts one’s anger, it goes away, you can’t express it.

B:  	Ra = to burn.  Ma = ignorance.   
Q:	Is japa of Rāma a more specific purifier than japa of Oṃ?   
B:	Depends on one’s devotion.  The word Rāma is related to a human figure, whereas the word [Oṃ] is related to three energies.   Rāma is easier to identify with.  Śiva is tāmasika energy, the energy of destruction, destruction of ignorance.   Rāma is sāttvika, the energy of preservation.

Action in dreams does not create [saṃskāras] because the dream is accepted as unreal by the mind.  Any action (speech and thought are actions) leaves a print, as long as we think we are the doer.  Saying to oneself  “Don’t make [saṃskāras]” makes a saṃskāra.  You have to be unattached to your actions.  To do makes you a doer.  The best way is to work and not get attached to the result.

B:	The child takes his parent’s saṃskāras… 
R:	… through the genes
B:	… and his own.   
[11/12/09, at the end of Gītā class, Babaji said the genetic code is grosser than saṃskāras.]

