6/19/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	What is your relationship with Jesus?   
B:	With his body or with his ātman?   
Q:	With his ātman.   
B:	The same as with God.

Q:	What is the self-consciousness that sets us off from others, unable to listen?   
B:	It is based on fear and developed by an inferiority complex.  One can get rid of it by accepting himself or herself.  We don’t accept ourselves.  That causes inferiority complex.   In fact, no one cares who you are or what you are.  They are busy in their own confusion.   We make it in our own mind that everyone is watching.

B:	Your mind is busy watching so many things.  If it is not, then you are not “open.”  If it is, then you will get tired.  It is the same thing as we discussed before, thinking everyone is watching you.

Q:	Neglecting needs of the body out of duty to help others.   
B:	It is austerity, purification.

B:  	Therapies such as Rolfing are related to purity of mind, and yoga is for purity of mind.   In yoga, those qualities are developed by themselves.  Whether yoga will develop from doing just those things alone, can’t say.   
R:  	Yoga can give same benefits.   
B:	A healer can be ignorant and confused on some levels.  A yogi can heal [himself] and also can attain enlightenment.

Q:	Having no menstrual period since doing sādhana…   
B:	It happens in several women, and I haven’t seen any physical damage from it.

Q:	Why does a person harbor evil thoughts?   
B:	In process of evolution, the part of negativity is stronger than positivity, so the mind develops and sticks to the negativity easily.

B:	If one needs little sleep, use the nighttime hours for meditation or any work in which the mind is concentrated.   

B:	For insomnia due to over-excitement, take three herbs -- see Ananta Michael Tierra.

B:	Mudrā in which eyes are rolled up and the lids partly open is one of the best meditation techniques.  If the eyes are open but the mind concentrated, they don’t see.

B:	In meditation the mind flows in a continuous stream.   Physical action stops that flow.

Q:	Compulsive behavior?   
B:	This is a weakness in everybody to more or less degree.   By doing sādhana, one develops will power.

Q:	Is it good to practice slowing down the heart?   
B:	Yes, but one can do it by controlling the breath.

B:	Sleeping on the back causes dreams.

B:	Too much sleep causes tamas guṇa to predominate.   When tamas predominates, the mind develops dullness.

B:	The four types of bliss are in the lowest cakra, the reservoir of kuṇḍalinī.  Sādhana, emotions, drugs, dreams, accident can awaken it.

B:	Break 5-10 day fast with soup of mung beans for one day, then cooked vegetables.

B:	Physical labor in which the breath gets faster affects sādhana.   

B:	The set of āsanas done on the stomach increases bile humor in the body.   Also nauli [does so].

B:	Surrender to a deity and you will get rid of all karma.  It is surrender that does it and not the deity.

B:	We all have our confusions.  In that confusion we are trying to keep ourselves stable.  Sādhana is the only cure for it, to purify the mind.

B:	In the process of sādhana, several ups and downs come.  Some people go crazy for several years.  Any object, form of God, or part of your body you can make an object of concentration.  Either watch it or visualize it.  That is meditation.

B:	A symbol is a form to explain the abstract.  Everything is a symbol, because it explains something about the reality.

Q:	To cleanse the lungs after many years of smoking?   
B:	Śītalī prāṇāyāma.

B:	Romantic love is love without knowing its real meaning.  Real love never changes.  There are no degrees in real love. 
B:	Switching the dominant nostril switches the dominant prāṇa.
R:	… of the five prāṇas.  
B:	It takes two hours, by clogging one nostril.   

B:	Udāna prāṇa is excited by jālandharabandha.

B:	Sect of those who travel for twelve years.  They travel in very unattached way, staying never more than three days in one place, eating food begged from five houses and no more than two pounds.  Keep the mind on God.

