8/7/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  The chalkboard reader was Shankar Clark Heinrich and his comments are noted with R. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was an editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q: 	Is there a divine plan? 
B:	Yes. 
Q:	Is it possible to go against it? 
B:	Actually, it includes both going with it and going against it. Negativity is equally as important as positivity. Ignorance is the cause of enlightenment. Evolution is caused by ignorance, and evolution is a vehicle for enlightenment. 
B:	It is not necessary to dredge up and clean out painful past experiences in order to meditate. Memories of the past, if reopened, will make a new saṃskāra. If left dormant, there is the possibility that it will decay. 

Q:	Is it always necessary to face whatever gives great fear, or if you are afraid of cobras can you just go where there are none? 
B:	By knowing the truth, you get over being afraid. To get over fear of a cobra you don’t need to go close to a cobra, because you know the cobra will attack. But if someone is afraid of a cat you can get over that fear by going close to a cat. 
Q:	But a cobra is dangerous? 
B:	Yes, a cobra is dangerous. 
Q:	Is fear an illusion?
B:	Yes. We can create fear. The root is fear of death. It is a very deep-rooted fear. It can go only after enlightenment. But if we accept the life which is birth, growth, decay, and death, then we will be less afraid. 

B:	The body never reincarnates. But the actions of this body, which make prints called saṃskāra, are the cause of reincarnation of the subtle body. If we don’t identify with this body, then there is no reincarnation. All those who identify with the body will reincarnate. Not in that body. 
Q:	Until 419 AD the Christian Church believed in reincarnation. Later there were other allegations of it that resulted in excommunication. 
R:	Jesus states it in several passages in the Bible.
B:	Gross body dies, and never reincarnates. Subtle body merely changes its form and passes to the next birth. The subtle body inside a gross body takes the form of that gross body. Water takes the form of a cup.
Q:	Are we aware of the incarnation of the subtle body into new gross bodies? 
B:	We are not aware of it. That is why we feel we were dead…. 
R:	… carry an imprint of death. 
B:	Those who are aware of it don’t experience death. Complete forgetfulness of past identities is death. In individuals there is no awareness that never dies. But change is the nature, and we don’t know the reality of that change. That is why we’re in ignorance. 

Q:	It is the mind that keeps us from merging with God? 
B:	The impurities of the mind keep us from merging with God. Try and figure everything out is the nature of the mind. You can’t stop it. That is the main problem. If you do stop it, that is samadhi. 
R:	… state of superconsciousness beyond the mind; the mind is nothing more than those thoughts. 

B:	Because the pull of this earth is so strong on the mind, we always reincarnate on this planet. But it is possible to reincarnate on another planet. 

Q:	George Ivanovich Gurdjieff said it is possible to reincarnate as a rock.
B:	I can’t accept it, because rock consciousness is totally different from human consciousness. A person can reincarnate just like a rock, without any activities, but not as a rock. 

B:	A drug is one means of activating energy, but which drug, how much, what time, and what kind of person should use it is to be decided. In old times, sages used soma, and had complete knowledge of its use. That knowledge has since been lost. 

Q:	Is there someone who can help us get there quicker?
B:	If you are fit to get there. Those who have developed one-pointedness, who have developed positive qualities, who have a strong desire to get out, those are fit. 
R:	When those conditions are present, the others will manifest on their own. 

B:	The humors are present in any body, in a particular equilibrium. When that equilibrium is disturbed, the body gets sick Can be disturbed by over-work, over-eating, mental work, physical shock, mental shock, eating the wrong food. 

B:	Vāta consists of the five prāṇa that make the prāṇamaya koṣa. Pitta is heating, increases suppleness of muscles and mental discrimination. 

Q:	Is it essential to remember one’s past incarnations?
B:	It is very difficult to make that link. When a person gets enlightenment, all his past, present, and future is revealed by itself. 
Q:	So not necessary. 
B:	It is not important to accept the idea of reincarnation, on faith, to get fullest benefit from yoga sādhana. When enlightenment comes, the truth reveals itself. A yogi doesn’t waste time thinking about what he was and what he will be. He works in the present. 

Q:	What is taking us so long?)
B:	The coverings of illusion. 
Q:	Enlightenment comes when we forget about ourselves? 
B:	You mean ego? [Babaji’s question]
Q:	Yes.
B:	Yes. There are nine levels of superconsciousness. Each has its own enlightenment. Nirvitarka samādhi is merging of mind with its object of concentration, without any outside thoughts. It is very difficult because the mind is a bundle of thoughts. 

B:	An enlightened being will react by reflex action, reflecting the thoughts of those around them. They eat, sleep, talk, and work. Their awareness is different. Consciousness switches from highest level to lowest level with lightning rapidity, so that the seers [others] can’t decide if they are out of the world or in the world. 
B:	You perceive an apple in your hand and in your mind. An enlightened being perceives an apple in his hand and not in his mind. 

Q:	If someone is laughing at you, how do you make them stop?
B:	By laughing yourself. Then they will stop laughing and ask you why you are laughing. 

B:	God and knowledge are not two different things. God has no limit. No one can say I have attained complete knowledge of God. 

Q:	People we know in this life who are very important to us – have we known them in the past?
B:	Yes. Also new relationships can occur. The past repeats. By the past karma, you create a situation to meet someone, or someone meets you because both have similar saṃskāra, similar desires. 

Q:	Does suicide become habit-forming? 
B:	In this life [Babaji’s question]?  Yes, it will make a saṃskāra. But a person will not necessarily commit suicide again. He may get a fatal disease, or an accidental death. Suicidal death is due to anger. Anger is a means of self- defense against fear. So in the next life, anger and fear will develop more, and create pain. There are social rules also. We can’t do everything we feel right. 

Q:	A way to die consciously to help other beings?
B:	Sit on the bank of the river Ganga and not take food until one dies. Meditating all the time. 
R:	Takes a lot of dispassion.
B:	Any river will do. 
B:	We see the name and form only.

B:	After samādhi, one can be in bliss for a month. 

B:	If you develop strength in your command (as to children), you will not need to hit. 
R:	They will know that no means no. 

B:	Concentrating on the locations of the cakra is enough. You don’t need a picture (visualizing). 

B:	As long as we are in the world, we are prisoners. 