7/17/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.
 

B:	In olden times, all saints were householders.

B:  	Your faith is God’s grace.  If you have faith, anything can trigger your consciousness.   Word for thirteen in Hindi means yours, and triggered renunciation for householder as he counted for a customer.  On this occasion his faith was there.   
Q:	How does one develop that faith?   
B:	By developing positive qualities and devotion.

B:	“Man must protect himself from the āśrama” means if a man becomes attached to the people and things, then again he is trapped.

B:	We are born with attachment.  Hunger first, attachment second, sex third.  A baby first wants milk, then wants his mother.  Then when he gets bigger he wants sex.  It makes a cycle.  It’s the evolutionary process.  If we want to stop it, we stop the things one by one, or put control on them.

B:	Sibling jealousy always happens.  They get into competition.  But if it gets bad, you have to show child its bad effect.  If he beats, harms, or tries to get rid of sibling.  Brothers and sisters always fight.  They also love each other and are attached to each other.

B:  	Want or need is the nature of desire.  Some are good and some are bad.   
Q:	How do you get away from the bad ones?
B:	By putting a limit on your needs.   No one is 100% perfect.   Life is made of negative and positive qualities.   Gradually develop the positive qualities.   This is the aim.

B:	Realization has different levels.  Some are very intellectual.  Their realization is different from those who have higher consciousness.  There are again different levels of higher consciousness.

Q:	Possible for someone who has attained complete realization to slip back down again?   
B:	No.  Not possible.  Some people mistake brass for gold.  Some stages of samadhi look like the highest stage.  From those stages one can fall down.  But when perfect realization is achieved there is no way to fall, because the person who falls is not there.

Q:	How can one learn to discriminate?   
B:	Discriminative ability is learned by concentration.  When the mind can become one-pointed on one object, the person can see its reality.  It doesn’t mean one should concentrate for one hour to discriminate.  The mind by practice of concentration develops this ability.

Q:	If a master has awakened śakti in one, can it go back to sleep?  
B:	If it is kuṇḍalinī śakti, it will remain.  If it is emotional śakti, it can calm down.    
Q:	How to discriminate?   
B:	If it calms down, it was emotional śakti.  Śaktipāta means to make the person the same as the guru.  It never happens to everyone.  Only one who is ripe, whose saṃskāras are weakened, can get it.   

B:  	Saṃskāras are passed on to the future by the semen, according to āyurveda.   
Q:	That means we inherit some [saṃskāras] from our parents?
B:	Yes.

Q:	If sādhana has been increased to the breaking point?   
B:	Stop all methods for 3-4 days, and then start from the beginning.  It will break that ego of doing sādhana.

Q:	Would it help to see parents, if never did?   
B:	By knowing yourself, you can know your parents.

Q:	How does one acquire devotion?  
B:	By being positive in your actions.  And thoughts.  Not hating, not getting angry, not being jealous.  In the Hindu religion, bhakti is a part of life.

B:	When there is a strong desire to get out of the pain of ignorance, one will do anything.

B:	In the Indian religion, initiation is given after three years of testing.  Sometimes after twelve years.

B:  	Pregnant women are air humor predominant.  Emotions increase in pregnancy.  Ether element increases.
R:	… which increases emotions.

Q:	Are you a realized being?   
B:	I don’t know.  Once a man asked a dog if he was a dog.  He barked.  His friends said, “Can’t you see he is a dog?”

Q:	How about consulting people who can read past lives?   
B:	If they can tell the present life, then they are true.  Life is not a limited thing.  Telling a few general things doesn’t make one a psychic.  Psychics are those who can tell you what’s in your pocket.   Who can test the past?   
Q:	Someone can tell you.

Q:	If all thoughts are inner sounds, concentrating on sound should give control of thoughts.
B:	Right.  This is the theory of nāda yoga.

When meditation goes right, you don’t feel you are meditating.  The mind plays with the object of concentration, unconcerned with you and what is around you. 

[Perhaps the question was about help from various teachers?]   
B:	The main thing is to get out of this darkness.  If someone gives you a staff, take it.  If someone gives you a flashlight, take that.  A match box, take that.

B:	First bhramarī makes nāda…
R:	… sound, 
B:	… and then gives laya of…
R:	… dissolution of the mind into 
B:	… nāda.  
R:	Babaji read Lāhirī Mahāśaya’s personal notebooks.  
B:	He describes doing 108 rounds of yoni mudrā.  Probably he did bhramarī first, then yoni mudrā.  First sound, then light.

R:  	Birth in a family may be only like two vehicles coming to an intersection from different directions and then going in different directions.

Q: 	Best method for stopping thoughts?   
B:	Prāṇāyāma.  It needs practice.  All yoga methods are for this.  Breath is life for the mind.   Breath and thoughts are not two different things.  In samādhi the breath stops because the mind stops.  Breath is like a fan and the mind like a flame.  If the fan moves, the light flickers.  If the fan is stopped, the flame stays still.

B:	Sunrise, sunset, noon, and midnight are the best times to practice [prāṇāyāma].  But sunrise and sunset are enough if one has no time to practice four times a day.

B:	Alternate nostril breathing should be very smooth.  Cotton fluff held in front of nostril during exhale should not move.

B:	Decreasing mucus (as by [prāṇāyāma]) decreases need for sleep.

Q:	In kali-yuga the ratio [proportion] of good is one fourth.  One’s relationship to God is one fourth?  By being one fourth good?   
B:	Kali-yuga is created by the mind and can be wiped out by wiping out all saṃskāras.  In kali-yuga an enlightened man is in satya-yuga.

B:	All incarnations of Viṣṇu are the same.

