8/21/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that the chalkboard reader in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


[The first questions and answers were missed.]

B: 	All religions have the same aim as yoga: to unite with God. 

B: 	Love in its purest form is God itself. 

B: 	The words, intellectual understanding of higher states, is like reading history and map of New York.  You know everything, but you are not in New York.

Q:	Is fear an illusion? 
B:	Yes. We can create fear The root is fear of death. It is a very deep-rooted fear. It can go only after enlightenment.  But if we accept the life which is birth, growth, decay, and death, then we will be less afraid. 

B: 	The Ganges has been worshipped for thousands and thousands of years.  The waves of meditation are dissolved in every drop of water that flows in it.  No one thinks of it as a river. Our thoughts make a thing.  You can see a woman as a mother goddess by your thoughts.  The evolutionary theory according to the Hindus is based on thought. 
	[Pravṛtti is caused by thought.] 

B: 	Highest life forms on other planets may be higher than man, and technology more advanced than man’s.  Our knowledge is very limited.  We don’t even know how many planets there are where there is life.  This planet was very advanced once.  Everything changes. 

Q:	The love between a man and a woman....
B:	That love is actually attachment.  There are expectations, and where there are expectations, you can’t avoid hatred.  Attachment is important for the evolutionary process. 

Q:	How to stop hating? 
B:	Do you know you are hating?  When one sees a rope as a rope, he can’t be tricked into thinking it is a snake.  Actually, you don’t know you are hating.  You feel it so real that you don’t ever think that it is hate.  If you go on thinking deeply about its cause, then you will see it. But at first we have to try not to hate.  Any form. 
R:	… of hate. 

Q:	Karmika duty.... 
B:	Negative or positive? 
Q:	Positive. 
B:	Why wait? 
Q:	Fear. 
B:	Fear is not going to decrease by hiding. As long as you think you are a doer, then you have to put your foot forward. 
Q:	If a person is not there, how can there be doer or duty?  [or was this Babaji’s question?] 
B:	If you are not a doer, then you are free.  Bondage is there when we are the doer. If some person thinks he has some duties in the world, then he should do it. 

Q:	Difference between duty and desire? 
B:	Desire is the cause and duty is its effect.  First desire comes, then you bind yourself to that desire and it becomes a duty. 

Q:	Do you consider yourself a doer? 
B:	Yes. People are asking questions and I am answering. 

B: Man has a special mind.  He is free in certain actions.  So he made his laws to have a better and peaceful society.  God’s law controls the whole creation equally, whereas man’s law can make a mistake. 

B: 	In evolution…
R:	… nature, 
B:	… all negative and positive qualities work equally.  There are selfish desires. 

Q:	Is it always karma, or saṃskāra, that puts a person in whatever situation he is in? 
B:	Yes. Karma is action, and it is saṃskāra when carried to next birth.  The print again makes karma.
R.	…causes you to act, to find yourself in the same situations. 
Q:	Can a nation have saṃskāra? 
B:	Yes. 
Q:	Do whole nations reincarnate? 
B:	According to their karma. Suppose a nation is drowned. The people will be at different levels: sāttvika, rājasika, tāmasika. The sāttvika will reincarnate later than the rājasika, etc. So first a tāmasika form comes and develops, then rājasika, then a sāttvika form comes and brings more intelligence. 

Q:	The idea that people in bad circumstances deserved it. 
B:	It is in all religions. 
Q:	And the idea that social injustice can be righted. 
B:	In Hinduism also. But they include social injustice in the karmic law. 
Q:	Makes people passive and indifferent? 
B:	We are not entirely chained by saṃskāra. We try to be better. We are suffering from disease. We are trying to get out of the disease. Both are according to karmic law. 

Q:	Land was stolen from the Indians........ 
B:	Everyone knows it. This is part of nature. Powerful beings overcome the weaker and try to destroy them. 

Q:	Is a baby’s innocence tāmasika energy in its pure form? 
B:	Yes.  Tamas is not always a bad thing.  A baby is actionless and can’t function in the world. It is a tāmasika state.  A saint [or state?] of ajagaravṛtti is the same.  A saint [or state?] that is a python.  Hangs from tree and waits for everything to come to it. 

Q:	Consciousness of baby in womb? 
B:	A kind of samādhi state. There is consciousness, but it is [fogged] by that state of samādhi. The child can feel hunger, but again it goes to sleep. 

Q:	Desires seem to rise with spiritual growth....
B:	On clean pants the dirt shows more. 

Q:	Śaṃskāra causes things like mental retardation? 
B:	Yes. Tamas predominates. It is not outside the karmic law, so it serves a function. 

Q:	Can the child feel the mother’s vibrations in the womb? 
B:	Yes.  It is imprinted into the child in the womb. 

Q:	Point when people start taking responsibility for their actions?
B:	When they start understanding their (physical) existence (cause and effect). 

Q:	Purpose of mantras Babaji gives? 
B:.	Depends on aim of person.  Mantra and aim work together. 
R:	Strengthens aim. 

R:	Babaji met Lāhirī Mahāśaya’s grandsons and read his notebooks. 

Q:	Will Babaji reincarnate, and has he reincarnated? 
B:	I don’t know. These things can’t be proven. 

Q:	Do you believe nothing positive comes from man-woman attachments? 
B:	Good for evolution. 
Q:	Keeping the creation going. 
B:	By the attachment, two people can feel love for each other, care for each other, feel responsibility. In this way they make a family unit. 

Q:	Attachment to wealth? 
B:	Wealth is important for functioning in the world. If one is attached to it, he will try to collect it. 

Q:	If one tries to get rid of his desires, will that slow down the evolutionary process? 
B:	For himself, not for others. 

B: 	Drugs are used in tantric ceremonies and by Śaiva and some Nāga sects. Some use it as a medicine and sharpen their minds, and some to get intoxicated and hide. 

B: 	Everything is predetermined, but it can be changed. 

Q:	If you really don’t want to be a householder, you can get out? 
B:	If not, you will naturally become a householder, or you will not but the desire will be there. [Babaji seems to have answered not the question can you avoid it, but the question what happens if one does not really want to avoid it.] 

B: 	According to yoga, expressing anger will make a saṃskāra and you will do it again. 

B: 	Expression is a relief for the moment, but not a cure. If you dwell on the positive, that will make a saṃskāra and it will be easier next time.  

Q:	Should one try to tell a person who is hurting you?
B:	Yes, it is you duty to try to change others. You change a wild horse into a tame horse. Someone who has experienced negativities in their peak [extremity] can influence everyone, just as someone who has experienced positive qualities can. 
R.	A saint. 

B:	Serving without attachment is sāttvika ego, pure ego. Doing good is still an attachment, and can be polluted if the ego has tāmasika elements. 

Q:	How can you tell beforehand if it is best to leave a situation, or try to change it or stay in it?
B: 	Some people can understand faster than others.  Sometimes you have to fight for what is right. 

B:  The aim of a spiritual situation is to bring peace.  If it does not bring peace, you have to get out. 
Q:	No place to go...... 
B:	It is a fear.  We think there will be no place if we leave a certain situation. There is and will be a place for everyone.  Only our fear keeps us in a prison.  I am talking about the situation where the teacher’s association is causing pain and you are not getting anything. 
	[unclear in original notes if this last sentence was the questioner’s or Babaji’s] 
	Medicine is for curing disease.  If it is making the disease worse, then we have to change medicines. 

