9/4/77 Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	How to keep good company without excluding others? 
B: 	If you are good you will attract good people naturally. 

Q:	To work with fear of death.... 
B:	If we once understand that we will die and no power on earth can protect us, then we will not be afraid.  Just like a soldier who is trapped in gunfire becomes fearless.  We only say all will die, but never I will die.  Even in that all we don’t include ourselves. 

B: 	We have experience of death from several lifetimes, so we can dream about death and life after death. 

Q:	Old people who are sick and say they want to die but they don’t die, why? 
B:	Even though we say we are not attached…
R:	… to the body, 
B:	the imprints of the mind are still there. 
R: 	Fear of death? 
B:	Attachment to life. 
Q:	How to help old people die peacefully? 
B:	Very difficult to accept death. If you are able to help them understand the cycle of nature, then probably they will not be so much afraid. 

Q:	Fellow tells old people who say they’re going to die: That’s great! 
B:	In India when a person dies, the people around him chant kīrtana.  They take him for cremation and chant the whole way.  Just before death they put him on the ground, grass or dirt. 
Q:	Why? 
B:	For the five elements. 
Q:	Is it joyous?
B:	I didn’t experience yet. 
Q:	Is the group joyful? 
B:	If the person is young, it is a sad case.  If the person is a sadhu, young or old, it is a joyous case. 

Q:	Cremation preferable? 
B:	Burning is a yajña in which the five elements are dissolved back into their original five elements. It is advantageous because it covers a smaller ground. The Jaina sect in India gives the body to vultures. 
R:	They don’t have gods. They worship discarnate saints. 
B:	They are strong followers of ahiṃsā.  Two sects:  one nude and one wears white clothes. Their practices..... Yama and niyama, austerity, meditation.  Austerity is their main practice. 

Q:	How to choose between two gurus, one not in the body but with stronger intunement, the other in the body? 
B:	The aim is to attain the truth, and both of them taught the same. 

Q:	Do you experience pain? 
B:	Physical, yes. 
Q:	What do you do when you experience it? 
B:	Play volleyball! 
Q:	Do you experience it by choice? 
B:	It is body saṃskāra. 
Q:	If you decide you don’t want to experience it? 
B:	Then I’ll not feel it.  It means no volleyball.  The natural work will go on in its own way: birth, growth, decay, death.  I am aware of all decaying of my body. 
Q:	How do you know you’re aware of it? 
B:	Just as you are aware of your car. 

B:	When one doesn’t speak, one saves energy for something else.  Inhalation – creation, holding = preservation, exhalation = destruction.  If you slow down inhalation and exhalation, then you can concentrate better. 
Q:	What is created, preserved, and destroyed in breathing?
B:	Prāṇa. 

Q:	Certain stage of meditation is reached when one starts seeing auras? 
B:	Yes. 

Q:	Infinite supply of prāṇa? 
B:	Yes.  But the apparatus should be in order.  Can’t carry water from the ocean in a pitcher with a hole. 

B:	Yogi with enormous strength by breath control allowed a steamroller to pass over his chest, and stopped a backing train engine by holding it. 
R:	Example of the kind of energy that is available.
Q:	Did you see it? 
B:	Yes. And his disciples. 
Q:	Related to kuṇḍalinī yoga? 
B:	He was a haṭha yogi:  ṣaṭ karma, āsana, prāṇāyāma. 

B:	In kali-yuga, thousands and thousands of yogis have attained enlightenment through aṣṭāṅga yoga.  Those who are pure are in sat yuga. 

Q:	What effect do the Egyptian pyramids have upon this planet? 
B:	It’s a method of restoring energy. No one knows.  But according to theory of three energies, they make six triangles inside the skull.  The top triangle preserves energy, the bottom triangle spends energy.  If the bottom one is turned up, then there is one four-sided triangle. This is the Egyptian-style pyramid. 
R:	So they may have known this theory. 

B:	Aṣṭāṅga yoga is one of the parts of rāja yoga. 

B:	Medical science has recently discovered that brain and spinal column and heart are formed 22 days after conception, and heart starts to beat also at 22 days. 

B:	Process of attraction determines which soul enters womb.  Saṃskāra of parents and of child-to-be, all three, determine the conception. 

B:	Saṃskāra create the mind waves, then thoughts create saṃskāra.  Cessation of thought waves weakens samskara. 

B:	Production of semen increases in adulthood, so celibacy is harder.  Not the same in everyone.  Some are late and some are faster.  Maturity of the semen. 

B:	For celibacy, all heating foods are avoided, all stale old food, spices, onions, garlic, eggs, meat. 
Q:	I heard Sai Baba drinks coffee.... 
B:	It is heating.  He is not 19 years old.  In south India people drink coffee and take chilis.  It suits that climate. 
Q:	Same as in Mexico, where also hot. Why? 
B:	It increases bile which protects from hot humid effects. 

Q:	Open self to truth.... 
B:	By developing positive qualities.  Compassion, contentment, tolerance, love, honesty, truthfulness. 

Q:	Anger that comes especially right after meditation or during sādhana….
B:	Fear.  Anger is the means of self-defense against fear.  After sādhana, all hidden tendencies come up. 

Q:	Feelings of fear in stomach and pain in heart — emotional, not physical.... 
B:	Keep a positive attitude. Several times we fail, but we try again and again. 
Q:	How to lose fear of failing? 
B:	By facing it. 
Q:	If a soul is aborted, will it keep trying to come back to the same parents.? 
B:	It can. 
R:	By saṃskāra, not conscious effort. 

Q:	Is there consciousness after death? 
B:	The mind you leave behind.  Only the saṃskāra turns into a seed form which includes the consciousness but no apparatus to express it.  Without a light bulb you can’t get light from electricity. 
Q:	Will I still be aware that I exist? 
B:	Who? 
Q:	There is something that is aware of my existence. 
B:	That is a seed. 
R:	But not an ability to reflect on your state. 
B:	After death you’re still including your form and name. 

Q:	How does one break the habit of comparing? 
B:	By not comparing.  There is no mantra for that. 

Q:	Fifty-five is a good age.... 
B:	For what?  It is a good age to die.  Blooming flowers offered to God. 

Q:	Fear of being caught stupid.... 
B:	It is an inferiority complex. If you try giving decisions without fear, then you will not feel it. There is not much difference anyway. 

Q:	Enlightenment…. 
B:	It’s not a vocal thing.  An enlightened person is free from all bondages. 

Q:	An intensive marathon experience.... 
B:	A drug, emotion, or accident can give the same experience, but it’s not enlightenment.  For enlightenment, you have to work regularly and vigorously with faith and devotion for several years. 

B:	Those who are not attached to the world are of no use for the expansion of the world. 

B:	Sniffing the smoke of long black peppers is treatment for start of head cold. 

B:	Several mantras for the goddesss Śakti are called śakta mantras. 
R:	Her devotees are called śāktaḥ. 
B:	Bodhi = knowledge, sattva = of truth. Bodhisattva = enlightened. 
R:	Despite the current idea that it means one who won’t accept enlightenment until all are enlightened. 

B:	The higher consciousness attained after nirbīja samādhi is beyond the mind, beyond fear, and beyond the stages of sleep, dream, and awake. 

B:	Seeing into the future and past comes by sādhana.

B:	After nirbīja samādhi there is no sādhana (for kaivalya). Your own self is the guru. 

Q:	Knowledge of immediate future, what is going to happen, may come from meditation. 
B:	When ājñā cakra is excited, one can see and forecast several things. 
R:	There are tribal rituals using this.


 