11/6/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass.

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Paper by Babaji on Mānasa Yoga as taught by Hariakhan Baba:

What you desire is what you will get, Hariakhan Baba said.

Seat of cetana śakti (jñāna śakti) is sahasrāra,
        of kriyā śakti is ājñā, the mind,
        and of karma śakti is pañca cakra

Parama, vidyā, and avidyā kṣetra are sattva, rajas, and tamas predominant, respectively.

Vidyā kṣetra:  manas (= control of information), buddhi, ahaṃkāra, and citta (= general consciousness).

Nāda sādhana, in vidyā kṣetra (pertaining to the subtle body):
   	āsana with breathing and timing
   	prāṇāyāma with kumbhaka
   	mudrā, meditation
   	practices for raising of kuṇḍalinī
   	piercing of six cakra

Bindu, when raised to ājñā, becomes nāda, subtle sound, and when raised to still higher level becomes light = kalā [spelling?].   

Kalā sādhana:  ajapa, paravairāgya, and surrender to God.


Questions and Answers:

Babaji:  Enlightenment is in different stages.  Very few attain total enlightenment.  That is when duality is totally wiped out.   
Q:	Is life in the world still possible?   
A:	Yes.  Duality is only in the mind.

B:	Medicine for asthma:  ginger juice, garlic juice, honey.
R:	… in equal parts.   
B:	Put in jar, seal it, bury underground for 15 days, then ¼ teaspoon a day.   Prāṇāyāma is not good, but vastra dhautī (swallowing cloth) is good, can cure asthma.

B:	At mūlaprakṛti, the guṇa are in equilibrium and inactive.   At ājñā they are not in balance and are active.   At mūlādhāra the energy is not balanced but is inactive, in a sleeping state.  In mūlādhāra they are called kuṇḍalinī.   In mūla prakṛti they are called parāśakti.  Both ends are inactive, but one is a sleep of total knowledge and the other is a sleep of total ignorance.

B:	Reducing tamas by eating light food helps for being able to remember dreams [not Babaji’s exact words].

B:	Sadguru is your higher consciousness which reveals the path.  Iṣṭadevatā is your favorite deity who takes you into him.

B:	Dream is a complicated real story of the past.  If you try to understand it, it tells much about the past of the present and the past of the past.  (?)  The past of this life and the past of past lives.   Because we don’t try to understand it, we think it is just our imagination.

Q:	Spiritual benefit of trāṭaka?   
A:	When we have thoughts switching it makes our eyes blink.  Fixed gaze stops thoughts and can bring samadhi.

B:  	At first in concentration the thoughts try hard to distract, even [if] the gaze is fixed 
R:	… or other forms of dhāraṇā attempted…
A:	… but later the mind withdraws.

Q:	Is anxiety a part of life?  Does Babaji experience it?   
A:	One who is more into the world, who has large needs, has more anxieties.  In comparison, I have less needs.

Q:	I feel I’ve come to a veil with light on the other side, if I can remove it.   
A:	There is not one but several, like an onion.  Go on peeling.

Q:	“All thinking is done with the heart.”  
A:	It means with faith.

Q:	Hearing about and reading about enlightenment helps?   
A:	Yes, it helps.  It creates a desire.  First stage is śubhecchā, which means this.

B:	When you write a song (for God), it comes from singing inside.  If you don’t sing inside, you can’t sing outside.   Same for painting or writing a book on God.

B:	Relation of metals to planets is one of energy.  Light of gold is similar to light of sun, of silver to light of moon (etc.).  The medium is one of light.

Q:	Why is copper considered a good metal for worship?  
A:	Blood is the energy, and copper relates to the blood.  The devas are also different energies.

B:	Faith makes a mantra work.

Q:	Should one change one’s sādhana periodically?   
A:	After twelve years.  It changes by itself.
R.   …if sooner.

B:  	Manas (mind), mantra, and prāṇa…
R:	… breath
B:	… should be united.   
R.	There should be awareness of all three.

B:	Our bodies and the earth have the same three energies, and they work in same way:  consciousness, action, matter.  We are so tiny compared to the creation that we can’t imagine, just as a germ in our blood stream can’t, but the three energies in that germ work in the same way.  The germ recognizes his own kind of germ, desires to grow, eat, and fight, and makes more germs.  So the germ is conscious and active and creates.  A germ, the human being, the planet, and the whole creation are exactly the same.  If we can see the germ completely, we will see that there is a complete planet in it.  There is no difference in the functioning of the three energies, but a human being has a higher consciousness.   We know the most minute thing and the largest thing.  A germ can’t.  A human being is considered superior in this respect.

Q:	Are energies shared in communicating?   
A:	Mind, sound, and body movement in communication are consciousness, action, and matter.   There is nothing that can function without these three energies.

B:	Babies breathe faster than grownups but blink less, sometimes don’t blink at all and remaining in a trance.

B:	Animals’ life span is less.  They have more active energy so the need more prāṇa and breathe more.  Snakes and elephants don’t breathe more.

B:	Hariakhan Baba would never talk in a flow, only symbolically, one thing here and one thing there.

B:	Vedas say in the beginning there was one being, a human being, and all the animals were a part of him.   In other places they say the same thing as Darwin.
B:	Truth is always followed.
