12/18/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014.  Comments in brackets are those of the typist.  Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	Sharp pain through center of head during meditation.   
B:	Change the center of concentration.   

Q:	Is faith necessary at appropriate moment in order for us to let go of duality?   
B:	Faith is the base.  Without faith we can’t begin it.  
Q:	Is main role of guru to be an object of faith?   
B:	Yes.  The guru creates faith by his wisdom and attitude.

Q:	Does breath have to stop entirely for attainment of samādhi?   
B:	In higher samādhi when mind has no thoughts the breath becomes so shallow it does not come out, and gradually stops all bodily and mental functions.   
Q:	How long does stage of very shallow breath last?   
B:	Shallow breath can remain for hours, and no breath can remain for 22 days.  After 22 days, the person either leaves the body or comes back into the body consciousness.

Q:	Trouble from society?   
B:	It is a personal thing.   If samādhi happens, society will not do anything.  But when you come out of samādhi, you don’t remain the same person, and everyone will know your higher consciousness by your changed attitude and wisdom.  Coming out of a sleep and coming out of samādhi are not the same thing.

Q:	Stage of Babaji’s samādhi?   
B:	There was no one else to see, and so I can’t tell what stage it was.

B:	By higher samādhi, everything changes.   As soon as you come out, you see different, feel different.

B:	If shallow breath happens after prāṇāyāma, then it stays for hours.

B:	During chanting Oṃ, can use point of concentration or concentrate on sound.

Q:	Best not to talk about one’s higher spiritual experiences?   
B:	Yes.  A sadhu is not supposed to talk about his sādhana in the present or past, because it takes the mind back into the past.  Sādhana can be discussed in general terms.

Q:	What is laya yoga?   
B:	When the mind is dissolved.  Yoga of dissolution of the mind.   
Q:	Is nāda yoga, a part?   
B:	Yes.   Sūrat śabda yoga, laya yoga, nāda yoga are same.

Q:	Mantra for use at any time?   
B:	Any name of God, or Oṃ, or ajapa:
R:	…. awareness of breath with same awareness of God or Oṃ with every inhalation or exhalation.

B:	In samādhi there is no mind, so no mantra:

Q:	Best way to get out of anger and resentment?   
B:	1) Find out its cause.   2) Dwell on the positive.

B:	Tulsīdās’s Rāmāyaṇa prescribes six-fold worship and mantras.   They are translated into English in Gita Press’s Rāmāyaṇa.

Q:	Motivation for sādhana?   
B:	To attain peace.   
R:	Correction for over-identification with the body and being ruled by it?   
B:	Have to put limits on desires.  Called austerity.

B:	Overly self-conscious means afraid.   If we understand that it is self-created fear, then we can get out of it.  

Q:	Why is it so easy to hurt the ones we love the most?   
B:	It’s like a bolt that is tightened too hard and cuts its own threads.   If we are too attached then there is no space to move.

Q:	Why is there such a strong desire to be attached to objects, people?   
B:	This is the nature of evolution.   
R:	The expansion of the world that keeps creation going, keeps the cycle of birth and death going.   
B:	World is created by two.  If the two are separated, there will be no creation.   
Q:	On highest level, Puruṣa and Prakṛti, when they are identified in one’s consciousness?   
B:	There is no attachment in their separation, when they are separated.

Q:	When the ego identifies itself as the body, there is attachment.   
B:	Union of Self and God is one identification, this is anotheR:  Self and God are separated in evolution: we don’t see God.

B:	God has no limit.  So there are always degrees of God-consciousness, of realization of God.   

Q:	Best thing to do every day to increase love for God?   
B:	Worship, prayer, reading spiritual books, lives of saints, bhakta.

B:	As long as we don’t develop the eyes to see inside ourselves, we seek peace outside.   There is no end outside, and no end inside.

Q:	Does God laugh and cry?   
B:	In the form of a being.

Q:	When does humanity as a whole reach enlightenment?   
B:	It never happened.

Q:	How does individual get linked with immortality?   
B:	When chain of birth and death is discontinued.

B:	The energy = I.   Self = body + energy, on lower level.   Higher Self = God.   [not exactly what Babaji said]   Self as an independent has no body. 

B:	Ego is cause of creation.   Five elements are created from it.   From their union, different objects are created and in each one an ego remains [maybe not exactly what Babaji said].   The ego in its pure stage is the Self.   When it is mixed with matter, [it is] the ego of identification.

Q:	Is the ego the mind?   
B:	It is a part of the mind.

Q:	What is true role and duty of father to mother and child when no longer living with them?
	To help with the child’s education and to watch that the child is well taken care of.   
Q:	Duty to pregnant woman?   
B:	To help her physically and emotionally.

B:	Purpose of not talking is… 
R:	… not to communicate by better ways but, 
B:	… to silence the mind.  If you stop the words first, it will eliminate several thoughts.  Because the desire to talk will be controlled.  The more we talk, the more we exhale.   The more we exhale, the more the mind becomes rājasika.