10/9/77  Satsang with Baba Hari Dass and the Hanuman Fellowship

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


Q:	Gospels and Gītā and Koran all say I am the way and the life, the only one.   
B:	To develop faith.  Child says my father is the strongest man in the world.  When he gets bigger he sees that others are just as strong as his father.  In all books they use “I” as the Self within.  When you have realized God then you don’t see the body.  You see that God.  And in that state when you say “I” you don’t mean the body.  [Satya] Sai Baba said I am an avatāra.   He did not mean that body.  When a saint stays at that level he talks as though God is there.   When at a lower level he speaks as though God and the person are separate.  

B:	Ayurveda says pregnant women should eat what they desire.

B:	Austerity:  deny the body its desires:  eat less, sleep less, talk less.

B:	If one concentrates on a question, the answer comes by the higher consciousness.

Q:	All religions say many are called but few are chosen.  Then later the idea is that few are chosen the first year, few are chosen the next year, etc.   
B:	Religions start from a truth and are polluted by their followers.

B:	In meditation, most people get lower samādhi.   Saṃskāras make attainment more difficult for some than for others [not Babaji’s exact words].

Q:	Jesus or John the Baptist said I am Elijah come again if you can accept it.  Later a council voted reincarnation out of the church doctrine.   
B:	They…
R:	… religions
B:	… will always argue, contradict, fight.  Yoga accepts the truth and there is no argument.

Q:	Will every soul eventually return to God?  
B:	Yes.  It is a natural path.   
Q:	Does away with idea of eternal damnation, of just having one chance, modern day interpretations of the Bible.   
B:	It is better to see the positive side.

B:	Yoga doesn’t take any religion.  The idea that it is for Hindus or Buddhists is wrong.  I say yoga, you can say yoke.  Root is “to join.”

B:  It is said that after age 6 a child changes his relationship to his parents.   
R:	The relationship is then more relaxed.   He is more independent.

B:	Yoga doesn’t waste time explaining who one was…
R:	… explaining past pain
B:	… and who one will be.   Like fixing one’s eyes on top of mountain and starting to climb.  No use looking down where you were.


