
10/30/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


B:	The eight kriyā belong to a group of eighty.  Prāṇāyāma condensed together.  Same effect as the four purifications.   [not all Babaji’s exact words]

B:	There is Halloween-like holiday called Holī in India in February.

B:	Śiva is consciousness and Śakti is action.  Without action, consciousness can’t function.

Q:	How to control bad effects of bad music?   
B:	Learn to switch the mind off.  If someone swears at you in Chinese, you won’t be affected [not Babaji’s exact words].

B:	If you start blaming… 
R:	… others for lack of right sādhana environment 
B:	… it will never end.  Why not in a solitary place?  Why lean on people?   
Q:	Enjoy being with people sometimes.   
B:	It is also a dependency.  Or you can learn to switch the mind, to be among people but inside, alone.

Q:	Are others’ reactions created by ourselves?   
B:	Mostly.  It is said that swans drink the milk and leave the water.
R:	… from a mixture.   
B:	One can take the positivities from anyone and leave the negativities.  We can see the good part in others just as we can see the bad part.  No one is 100% perfect.

B:	Karma yoga is selfless action.  Anything you do with that attitude is classified as karma yoga.  It is one of the methods to develop non-attachment, which leads to enlightenment.   Action from which one expects self-improvement is a different thing, not karma yoga.

B:	Our duty is not to destroy nature.  Nature is such a complicated mechanism that it creates a mechanism to destroy its destroyer.   
Q:	Is it our duty to increase positive forces?  
B:	Yes.  Man is the second ruler of the earth after God.

Q:	What is the relationship between heart and mind?   
B:	The heart is the emotional mind.  It is the seat of citta or Self.

B:	Policeman and criminal both have one thing in mind: crime.  But they don’t share the same karma.  The prisoner and the guard both live in prison, but one is free in his mind and the other is in prison in his mind.

Q:	Evangelism, pushing own ideas on others, is what?   
B:	Fear.  People try to be accepted in all levels.  For that reason they push their ideas.

B:	Clarity of mind is better than devotion with confusion.

R:	Yugas apply to physical world.  Whole world is in kali yuga.  But an individual can be in sat yuga in kali-yuga.   That is on a subtler level.

B:	Aim is a pulling force and your practices are a pushing force.

Q:	Avoiding intensity that makes one crazy from desire for enlightenment…. 
B:	It is a third degree.  Mild, not moderate or intense.  Athletes who go to the Olympics, how hard do they work?  But a wise person works with understanding, and he has knowledge of his work and his capability, which he keeps in his mind.

Q:	Spiritual path makes own existence more painful….   
B:	Yes.  When the water is dammed, it always hits hard.  Before, the water was flowing in its natural course and you were not aware of anything.  Now you see it more.
 
Q:	Does a species incarnate to another species?   
B:	One rose is decorated…
R:	… decoration 
B:	… in a room and its brother is smashed by some feet on the road.  Saṃskāras are both individual and collective.

Q:	Children play with weapons.   
B:	There were always wars.  We were born with an instinct to fight for possession.  For fighting we need something because we were born higher than animals, who don’t use any weapons.   But we can change this instinct because there is no necessity.  The more you stop…
R:	…them, 
B:	the more they will try to play.  But you can make them understand that guns are not good.

Q:	Therapies that involve beating pillows, getting negativities out, such as Fisher-Hoffman therapy in relation to parents.   
B:	Next day you will have to beat again.  Then it will become a habit.  Negativities can’t go away by acting.
R:	… them out.   
B:	It will make one more print.  It can go by positivity.   
Q:	If beating and yelling helps?   
B:	It is at that time, because you are tired of beating and yelling.


Q:	Father, Son, Holy Ghost.   
B:	Consciousness, energy, matter [Son, Father, Holy Ghost].  Consciousness and matter are inactive without energy.  In evolution, these three remain in equilibrium.  When this equilibrium is disturbed, they start acting together and mixing.  The matter starts getting denser.  That matter becomes the creation and in that creation, consciousness and energy start to reside.  It is always energy that is the disturber [creator], because the other two can’t act.

Q.	How can one retain equanimity in face of criticism of sādhana and intensity, by people close to one?   
B:	It is a test, a part of sādhana.  To overcome all obstacles.

Q:	In the beginning was the Word and that Word was God.   
B:	Same as in yoga.  In the beginning was a sound and that sound was God.  The sound Oṃ.   Yantra for it: triangle.  The three corners:  consciousness, energy, matter.

Q:	Any meditation or practice that will break one’s attachment to one’s body?   
B:	Death.  In tantra, death is used as an object of meditation.   
Q:	Don’t have much of a concept for that.   
B:	Did you see any dead person?

Q:	Martial arts.   
B:	1. Learning is okay.   2. It can’t face a gun.   3. It won’t bring you peace.   
R:	Won’t take you to the highest goal.

Q:	A planetary “convergence”….   
B:	Once eight planets lined up.  Nothing happened.  People said the earth would drown.

B:	Expecting and dependency are both part of our nature and both pull us down to the ignorance.  We can make someone crippled by making them dependent on us.   
Q:	How to differentiate in giving?   
B:	You can see the real need.  China was crippled like that, and when they realized they revolted.  You can make a person realize.

B:	Karma yoga, selfless service, makes [causes] no attachment.   It is a difficult yoga because our mind plays tricks in every level of life.

B:	There is a cooling mudrā to do regularly to lessen occasional irritability.

Q:	Will regular sādhana decrease influence of planets?   
B:	Yes.


Q:	Difference between energy and consciousness?   
B:	Active and inactive.  Consciousness is also an energy, but it can’t act by itself.  When it acts, it becomes energy of acting.

Q:	What to do if a person’s real needs seem different from one’s own.   
B:	Your needs are important for existence.   
R:	Your only needs are those necessary for survival.

Q: 	If you think about death all the time, will it make it happen sooner?   
B:	If you are not attached, what difference does it make?   
R:	Meditating on death and reaching nonattachment to life, to the body, means not coming back.


