
11/20/77  Satsang of the Hanuman Fellowship with Baba Hari Dass

It is likely that the chalkboard reader (R) in this darśana was Shankar Clark Heinrich.
It is also likely that this transcription was originally done by Chetana Mary Jennings from
contemporaneous notes and typed in circa 2014. Comments in brackets are those of the typist.
Additionally there was editing in 2024 for format and implementation of IAST transliteration.


B:	Picture full moon disk inside ājñā for concentration.  It is cooling.

B:  	Hunger, possessiveness, sex:  we develop these in this order as soon as we take birth.   Possessiveness can’t be limited so long as desires are there.  If possessions are thrown out and the desires remain, they will make the same world again.  So the first thing is to limit the desires which create possessiveness, hunger, hatred, jealousy.   
Q:	How?   
A:	By putting a limit on desires in our day-to-day life.  For a moment we can understand the cause of our pain and turn away our mind and feel good, but it comes back.  Because the desires are not reduced or limited.   
Q:	Isn’t it suppression?   
A:	Are we not suppressing everything [Babaji’s question]?   Because our desires have no limit and we can’t have what we want.

B:  Tantra is not indulging.
R:	… of desires.   
A:	Tantra is a way of using the senses to get control over the senses.   If there were freedom of desires, then there would be no ritual, no discipline, no sādhana in tantra.  In tantra there is a very strict discipline.   
Q:	How does one use the senses to control the senses?   
A:	They and their instruments are worshipped and symbolically used with an awareness to putting a limit.  It is done by rituals.

Q:	Difference between instinct to survive and the ego?   
A:	I want to live is the inherited nature of all beings.  Ego is to recognize one’s existence separate from others. 

B:  	The five senses come from the tanmātra.
R:	… subtle elements, subtle senses, energies of seeing, hearing, etc.   
A:	They are related to solidity, liquidness, etc.

Q:	How to decide whether children should be brought into the world?   
A:	Having children is a natural desire in beings.  It is because you have devices for stopping it that this question arises.  Those who don’t have these devices don’t think about it.  They accept the law of nature.  If you feel capable to take care of children, then you can have.

Q:	Can we gain mastery over the five elements by trāṭaka on a candle flame?
A:	Yes.   When samādhi is attained.

Q:	What are desires?   
A:	Thoughts, desires, saṃskāra, these are the same thing.  We use them [these terms] differently, according to the situation.  I want to live is the basis, the fundamental desire [not Babaji’s exact words].

Q:	Meditation and dispassion?   
A:	When the mind goes in, it doesn’t care about outside.  Non-contact with people starts when a person starts contacting inside.   
Q:	I thought dispassion was different from aloofness.   
A:	Aloofness could be one’s fear.  Dispassion is fearlessness.   
Q:	Dispassion?   
A:	It’s only on an emotional level.  You can function outside, only you don’t feel it’s real.

B:  	Everyone’s saṃskāra are different.  People’s saṃskāra may be related on several levels, spiritual, social, emotional [not Babaji’s exact words].  If you can’t relate to anyone it could be your saṃskāra of not getting along with others….   If you force others to accept your ideas, then the friction will start.   
Q:	If others want to force you?   
A:	Then you have to move away.

B:	Hanging around with people because you want it and then feeling guilty because you are not doing you spiritual practices causes fear and you start avoiding people.  But one of the emotions that comes in sādhana is avoiding people.   

Q:	Emotional feeling of closeness with other people without words.   
A:	It’s not a real thing and it’s not imaginary.  It’s a state of mind that comes from sādhana. 

Q:	If change is right?   
A:	Lower level always follows [higher one], so no conflict.  If you are in a higher level, you don’t need to see lower levels.   
Q:	Trouble relating to people on lower level….
A:	Because your consciousness goes to that level.

B:	Soul is same in any being [not Babaji’s words].  You can put tea in earthen cup. glass cup, silver cup. gold cup.  The tea is the same.  Only the cup changes.   

Q:	Wondering if one is really inside a dog and not a human?   
A:	Happens when the mind becomes unbalanced.

Q:	Accepting only what we like in another person….  
A:	We all want the light part and not the dark part.  We don’t want to accept the whole person.   It always creates a separation.  If we can accept the whole person we can grow together and wipe out each other’s dark spots.

B:	Sādhana’s result is to create dispassion, not attachment.  You will not care what others say or think, you will just do your sādhana.

B:	The individual is a reflection of Puruṣa, the absolute.  It needs Prakṛti or matter to reflect [it].   Puruṣa creates Prakṛti.  Prakṛti creates the individual and reflection occurs automatically.
[In the original transcript, the sentence “Puruṣa creates Prakṛti,” is followed by a question mark in parentheses, which could express uncertainty whether these were Babaji’s exact words, or which could instead mean the scribe was surprised at the statement and unsure how to understand it.] 

B:	Paramātmā and Bhagavān are the same.  Brahman is absolute.  Only Brahmā is lower.

Q:	Are there “new” souls that come into a body with no [saṃskāras]?   
A:	No.  When mahat is created, then saṃskāra are also created.  [Saṃskāras] are also eternal.  We can’t trace out any individual saṃskāra.  Mahat is the first action.  As soon as there is action, there is saṃskāra.  So every soul already has saṃskāra.   
R.	Original sin.  

B:	Līlā is play.  The play is the union of Puruṣa and Prakṛti.  Two different forces coming together and creating a third.  Purity and inertia  action, play.

Q:	Jīva in animal form have not yet reached human form?   
A:	Evolutionary process:  lower mind, higher mind, highest mind.  According to the state of mind, we classify [jīvas], beings.

Q:	Saṃskāra are similar in some people.   
A:	That is how we attract and repel.

B:	There can be souls that are incarnated as humans this time for the first time.

B:	We carry all the saṃskāra from mahat to a fly.  But when we are in a particular body, only the saṃskāras that will help that body are active.  The others remain dormant.  So our route to God is always there, even though we pass through several dark caves.

B:	Some people are allergic to putting water in the nose.
R:	… jala neti.
