These are the questions and answers with Baba Hari Dass at the Hanuman Fellowship [Satsaṅga] at the Pacific Cultural Center on Sunday, June 1, 1997. Janardan read the chalkboard. Reading: Bhagavad [Gītā]: XVIIL: 49-52. [This [darśana] was transcribed in shorthand by Pratibha Queen concurrently and later typed for distribution. In November 2024 it was re-formatted and lightly edited to use IAST transliteration.]
Q: Verse 49 mentions “when all desires are exalted.” What does this mean? 
A: What puts down the ego? The desire of worldly objects. The ego feels “I am the performer and enjoyer.” The feeling of enjoyer and performer are expressions of egocentric desires, then those desires are removed. The same ego is established in its pure state of the Self. 

Q: Arjuna is following his duty to destroy evil by fighting a righteous war. In the Vietnam war, people were asked to kill for their country which in my view was a wrong war. How can one understand one’s duty when asked to perform in the battlefield in an unrighteous war?
A: Fighting for selfish reasons is not right. Here Arjuna was not fighting for selfish reasons. He wanted to be a renunciate to avoid the war. So the reason to fight was within the dharma of a [kṣatriya]. If we see it symbolically, it is also right. The dharma of an embodied soul is to fight for its freedom from all evil propensities of the mind. 
Q:At what point do you surrender and cultivate contentment, simply accepting “I am what I am; I can’t change my past” and give up the intense conflict?
A: A loser surrenders. When the ego becomes helpless and loses all its energy, then its last weapon is to surrender or take refuge in God. 

Q: The concept of the exhaustion of the ego is confusing to me. If the ego becomes purified and identified with its true Self, then the ego always exists? 
A: The ego which functions through the mind in a form of “I am the doer” gets exhausted, but the pure ego “I am” remains with no attachment to the mind. When we talk about the ego, we see all its bad sides which are in reality bad sides of the mind. 
Q: What is the difference between uparati and [vairāgya] (dispassion)? 
A: In [Vedānta], uparati term is used for [vairāgya]. Means the same. 

Q: Could you reread #4 from verse 49 regarding non-attachment of the intellect from the objects of senses in the world?
A: The senses are the outer extensions of the mind. If the senses are not controlled, the mind will never be controlled. The senses work with attachment and desires. A question arises how an enlightened sage functions in the world. The mind of that sage will also be disturbed. But if the attachment and desires are not there, then the senses will function mechanically. 

Q: have read about Maharishi Mahesh Yogi who says that the technique to control all thoughts makes the mind stagnant. He says for a beginner one should isolate a divine thought and follow it to its cause. A: If a meditator fixes one object to meditate, then naturally all other thoughts will be resisted in order to keep one thought of the object. Suppose you have to find a yellow rose in a garden of different kinds of roses. Your mind will keep the memory of the yellow rose and your eyes will look only for the yellow rose. Rejecting all thoughts is of course not right and not possible, unless one is in [nirvicāra samādhi]. 
Q:If one is practicing the dance [Rasa Līlā], when is it that Radha exhausted her ecstatic love?
A: [Rasa Līlā] is a Hindu term for [rahas līlā]. It means play of the real existence. 
Q: What does it mean symbolically? 
A: [Rahas līlā] was [śakti], always in love. 

Q: If there are nagging desires, is it better to act on them and learn from then, or is it better to meditate on the desires and reconcile them in that way, recognizing them as a pull to the world?
A: Practically it is very hard to shun the desires unless one is born with extreme dispassion. But for common people. the best way is to watch the attachment that develops by fulfillment of desires. 

Q: What does it mean to practice yoga in daily life?
A: Yoga means union of lower self with the higher Self. Any action, thought, emotion, etc. which keeps separation of the two should be removed and that is Yoga of all time. Now the question will arise, how? There are so many different kinds of Yoga. The result of all Yoga systems is the same; Union of the lower self with the higher Self. Aṣṭāṅga Yoga system teaches all rules of living with even-mindedness, physical postures, meditation methods, breathing practices. It’s a practice for everyone. The yoga of wisdom, [Jñāna Yoga], is for those who have penetrating intellect and are able to dissect the real from the unreal. Tantra Yoga is for those who want to control desires but cannot control the senses. So they bring senses and sense objects together and give a ritualistic form to remove desires. 

Q: The enlightened sage’s mind gets disturbed but there is no attachment or desire for that sage. Could you say more about that?
A: Agitation with self-interest and agitation with interest for the society or the world are different. An enlightened sage who has no self interest left is only working for others. If any obstruction appears, the sage may look agitated, but that is momentary. 

Q: In the process of uniting one’s lower and higher self, is it best to use a grab bag of all different techniques or to focus on one mantra, or one method, or one deity? . 
A: One arrow which hits the target counts. You can use as many mantras as you want. The main thing is what makes the mind single-pointed. If the mind remains multi-pointed, then the mantra is parrot-like chanting.

Q: Why does the body jolt around in moments of good concentration? A: The mind loses body consciousness for a short time, then wakes up and becomes conscious again. It creates that jolt. It also happens when someone nods. 