These are the questions and answers with Baba Hari Dass at the Hanuman Fellowship Satsang at Pacific Cultural Center on Sunday, September 17, 2000. Prem Dass read the chalkboard. Reading: Bhagavad Gita IX: 5-8.  [These notes were transcribed in shorthand concurrently by Pratibha Queen who later typed them for distribution.  In 2024 they were edited for the addition of IAST and certain other formatting.]
Q: In referring to the age of Brahma, is that beyond our normal time span or is it within what we consider time?
A: Human time and Brahma's time are different. Brahma's time is much vaster than human time. Human time and an ant's time is also different. 
Q: But the human mind has the ability to conceive of Brahma's time? A: The human mind can calculate Brahma's time in terms of human yugas. 
Q: What's the factor that makes the different times different?  A: So what's the difference in our time and an ant's time? Q: A lot slower. A: Human life span is up to I00 years. An ant in a few days reproduces 3 or 4 generations, enjoys life and dies. 
Q: So creation as we know it stops and time starts up again? A: [Kalpādau], verse 7, 1s the beginning of a kalpa and [kalpakṣaya] is the end of a kalpa. Q: So the creation as we know it will dissolve?  A: Yes. Anything that is created will dissolve. 
Q: About predictions about people's lives written on palm leaves hundreds of years ago by a [ṛṣi].. A: [Bhṛgu Saṃhitā]. [Bhṛgu] was a sage. His astrology is called [Bhṛgu Saṃhitā]. Very few now know of [Bhṛgu] astrology. Only 3 or 4 are in India. 
Q: Is it possible for a sage to see the future? Can those predictions be relied upon?  A: It tells important things in one's life. How much it is true, I don't know. They don't tell the names of a person and parents but tell the symbols which indicate that name.
Q: Is the future fixed? Has it already happened? A: If it's all fixed then why did the scriptures talk about getting liberation? Q: In this level, it's not fixed. But the past and the future have to be one. On a higher level . A: On a cosmic level, everything's fixed. But in the egocentric level, everything is changeable. 
Q: What do you do if you find your delusion contributing to another person's delusion? Suppose two people have a dream and one person recognizes some negative pitfalls of the dream. Should the person inform the other person or remain silent?  A: There's no harm in trying to save someone else. 
Q: In verse five it says "I do not dwell in them." Is that different from the Vedantic philosophy in which everything dwells in God or the Self?  A: It's a different way of telling that only Brahman exists and everything else 1s just maya or illusion. 
Q: In the past life we come across many people and owe them [karma] debts. Is it possible to end those [karma] debts consciously in this lifetime? A: Yes, [karma] are supportive and destructive. The supportive [karma] are strengthened by living a virtuous life. Its result is ending the negative [karma]. 
Q: What should be the goal of one's life? A: To achieve eternal peace. Is there anything higher than this? 
Q: What does a virtuous life consist of? A: In [Aṣṭāṅga]Yoga the ten rules of yamas and niyamas. But we can understand it in a simple way: To be honest to yourself and others, not to harm others, devotion to God and reflect on your selfishness. 
Q: When we have friends who are going in different ways, we move away from each other. But if we are going in a different way from our family, can we move apart from them? A: The path can be different but the aim can be the same. If the aim is also different, then the path will separate in all situations. Q: It seems that friends sometimes know us better than our family; with our family it seems like we take ten steps backwards in our relationships. It seems we can make better progress with our friends. Why is that? A: It depends on the family. It's not the same for everyone. For some families, it becomes the main spiritual support. 
Q: Who helps make the decision which way to move in life when someone is first born? Is there another consciousness available, a guiding principle, to help the person move forward? A: Yes, it's in human nature to experience the world and get liberation. We don't need to learn it. We only learn what's good and bad from our parents, friends, society and religions. 
Q: In the scriptures it says that the last minute before you die is important for the next life. Could someone become an animal if they are working and living with animals? A: It’s not the spontaneous thought that appears [which determines the next birth]. One who desires to be a human or an animal, this thought appears at the time of death. Several spontaneous thoughts also appear but they won't decide the next birth. One drug addict may desire to smoke marijuana at the time of death but will not be reborn as a marijuana plant! 
### 
