
xiv:18-21
8/19/93

Q.  Verse 19
B.  When you look in the mirror you see yourself.   But you are a living, talking person, the reflection is not; so you are higher than your reflection.  But in the case of the Self and Pure buddhi,  the reflection illumines the pure buddhi.  So you know two things:
1.  reflected self = the ego self
2.  pure Self, whose reflection is the ego
If you put the mirror in the sun, the sun will reflect in it.  The reflection of the sun in the mirror will also reflect.  In the same way that reflection of the Self reflects all the evolutes of prakriti.  

Q.  We see both the Self and the reflection at same time?
B.   "We" means?  Pure 'I sense.'  That pure 'I sense' means sun glasses of buddhi.  You and your reflection are the same.  Without you there is no "your reflection."  You have to keep in mind that the mind is only three gunas.  They have their qualities and activities but they are dormant until the Self reflects.  
When the Self reflects:
1.   sattwa = knowledge
2.  rajas = activity and passion
3.  tamas = inertia
All three start working at the same time.  The reflected self or ego self only knows "I am," so it claims all the action of the gunas  as "I am."

Q.  When buddhi  is known as a reflection of purush,  does the distinction of prakriti  and purush  fade away?
B.  Buddhi  is the mirror.  The Self is reflected in it.  That reflection is the ego self.
Q. prakriti
B.  (Nods yes.)  The ego self is an evolute of prakriti  because it works with prakriti.  When the buddhi  is known as "not Self" then that relationship of the Self and buddhi  is removed.  The ego doesn't put it back or take it, it's the buddhi  which is carrying it in all its activities.  If we say the ego does it, then the ego is three gunas.  
Q.  Isn't it?
B.  Desire and attachment are in buddhi  
Q.  Isn't ego the three gunas?
B.  Ego is three gunas  only when dwells in buddhi.  Ego is the substratum of satwic, rajasic, tamasic, three types of ego.  Will is in buddhi.  The will only removes passion for the world.
Q.  But the world still exists
B.  The ego self expresses itself through passion and action.  When passion and action are subsided than the ego has nothing to do with buddhi.  Buddhi  becomes inactive = three gunas  has solved their purpose.  The ego rediscovers its fundamental nature.


Q.  Ego from conscious principle; mind from prakriti ?
B.  Union of spirit and matter constitute cosmic intellect.  This cosmic intellect is aware of duality by saying "I am."  That pure "I sense" reflects back on individual buddhi   and becomes individualized ego.  Only purush  is conscious; prakriti  is not.  So in that union, "I sense" comes from purush. 

Q.  Buddhi  sattwa = consciousness reflecting in prakriti
B.  Mahat, sattwa buddhi
buddhi = matter principle but conscious. 
Now what is that consciousness?  "I sense."
Q.  "I sense" = I + prakriti
B.  Yes
Q.  Dissolution = no identification with prakriti . So how does a teacher teach?
B.  The jiva  who was in ignorance got enlightened.  All other mechanics remain the same.  The yogi  will never forget that s/he is brahman  but prakriti  is also eternal.  Because the brahman  exists in body, so the body is alive and functioning, collecting.  Otherwise the saint would not see any difference between a dog and a horse.

Q.  Theory of gunas  is comforting
B. What is comforting in it?  If tamas guna  predominates
Q.  We can control
B.  Yes because during that period everything is dormant
Q.  Nothing more than deep sleep
B.  Yes, but who is sleeping?
B.  Conscious mind
B. Jiva
Q.  Why feel comfort in nature if nature = tamas?
B.  Three gunas
Q.  Are dolphins tamasic
B.  In comparison to human consciousness level
Q.  Why feel inspired by them
B.  How you feel depends on your egocentric desires.  If a crazy man is happy and laughing, it doesn't mean he is in a satvic state
Q.  cow
B.  Cow is used for milk
Q.
B.  Sunset is very exciting to some and to some it is very painful.  Why it affects in two ways?  Cow is an animal so cow is a symbol of earth.  It feeds and nourishes a child of humans.  Its four legs represent the four yugas.  The symbols become a reality.  The sound of "A" is represented by the form of "A."  Now the form of "A" is a reality.