These are the questions and answers with Baba Hari Dass at Hanuman Fellowship Satsang at Pacific Cultural Center on Sunday, April 11, 1999. Prem Dass read the chalkboard. Bhagavad Gita IV: 9-12. Original transcription by shorthand contemporaneously and soon after typed up by Pratibha Queen.  Formatting and IAST use added in November 2024.

Q:	When [Śrī Kṛṣṇa] says the teachings were lost, how were they lost? Were they just forgotten?
A:	Practitioners developed selfishness, attachment and desires.

Q:	The [deva]s were described as the sense organs. Could you talk more about that?
A:	[Deva]s comes from the root word diva which means shining ones. The divine energies of nature are the [deva]s ­– of the sun, moon, ocean, etc. In our body, the devas are the sense faculties. And by our sense faculties, we achieve knowledge of the outer world.

Q:	Is language ([śabda]) necessary for conceptual ([jñāna] knowledge? Or is language only necessary if we want to communicate with other people?
A:	For worldly knowledge, yes, it’s necessary. For divine knowledge, language has no importance because it is experienced.

Q:	Is it important to determine exactly which category (Karma, Bhakti, [jñāna] we ourselves are practicing?
A:	Karma Yoga is mixed in Bhakti and [Jñāna] because any mental and physical activity, devotion or knowledge can’t be practiced. Those who are naturally more devotional, their devotion predominates in any method that they practice. Similarly, knowledge predominates in the activities of intellectuals.

Q:	Is there  an external action to help with the war in Kosovo? Is there an appropriate internal attitude to have toward the conflict?
A:	External action: for those who are living in different countries, action is to send money, clothing, food, etc. But everyone can’t go there to help them physically. They can express their compassion by denouncing the aggressors. Everyone has a right to live. They are the same people except they have different religions.

Q:	What is the benefit or purpose of meditating on the aura?
A:	It’s one of the methods of meditation. Some people are more visual and the aura is more visual to them and they can concentrate deeper on their own light. Different methods don’t have different effects. Different methods are for people of different temperaments. The result is the same.

Q:	The reading spoke of Bhakti Yoga. It mentioned mostly surrender as a result of the methods. What is surrendered – the ego, the will, the Self?
A:	In our life, the loser is our ego. It doesn’t accept anyone’s rule over itself. When this ego loses the battle in life, then it surrenders or accepts a higher energy over it.

Q:	How can the energy of the senses contribute positively to Bhakti Yoga without the sense experience getting in the way or getting trapped in the senses?
A:	The nature of the senses is to experience the world. The eyes will see, the tongue will taste the nose will smell, etc. But the next development of the experience is getting attached to objects. If this attachment is removed, then all sense experience will turn to spiritual experience.

Q:	Is the ego unique only to the human experience?
A:	Yes, the human ego has two things: 1) experiences, 2) it knows how to get out of experience. Other living beings only experience. They can’t think of getting liberation.

Q:	What does it mean to lose the battle in worldly life?
A:	When the ego knows its limitations. For example, a sick person who knows that he or she can’t cure him or herself and prays to the Lord to get cured. In that prayer is surrender.

Q:	I thought that in surrender one accepts the illness and doesn’t necessarily pray for a cure.
A:	Accepting the illness means that the ego has found its limitations.

Q:	Suppose someone understands that they can’t remove the pain of the world and accepts the higher power. Is that another example?
A:	Yes.

Q:	About the ego and liberation: is the ego an entity which needs to get liberation, or is it something that is dropped off and forgotten when liberation happens?
A:	Ego is our life. Without it we can’t experience the world. But in that process of experience it creates its own prison. One who is in prison needs liberation. How does it get liberated? By removing its involvement with all mental activities as its own.

###






